1 § Det avtal för undvikande av dubbelbeskattning och 
förhindrande av skatteflykt beträffande skatter å inkomst och 
förmögenhet som Sverige och Grekland undertecknade den 
6 oktober 1961 ska gälla som lag här i landet. Avtalet är 
avfattat på engelska. Den engelska texten och en svensk över-
sättning av avtalet framgår av bilagan till denna lag.

2 § Avtalets beskattningsregler ska tillämpas endast till den 
del dessa medför inskränkning av den skattskyldighet i Sverige 
som annars skulle föreligga.

3 § Bestämmelserna i artikel XXIII § 2 i avtalet ska inte 
tillämpas i fråga om inkomst hos en svensk juridisk person som 
får beskattas i Grekland enligt artikel IV i avtalet, om 
inkomsten inte beskattas i Grekland på grund av att Grekland 
inte anser att den juridiska personen bedriver verksamhet från 
fast driftställe där.


Övergångsbestämmelser

2019:1197

1. Denna lag träder i kraft den 1 januari 2020.

2. Bestämmelsen i 3 § tillämpas första gången för 
beskattningsår som börjar efter den 31 december 2019.

3. Genom lagen upphävs kungörelsen (1963:497) om tillämpning 
av ett mellan Sverige och Grekland den 6 oktober 1961 ingånget 
avtal för undvikande av dubbelbeskattning och förhindrande av 
skatteflykt beträffande skatter å inkomst och förmögenhet.

2021:573

1. Denna lag träder i kraft den 1 januari 2022.

2. Den upphävda lagen gäller dock fortfarande i fråga om

a) inkomstskatt, för skatt på inkomst som har förvärvats före 
ikraftträdandet,

b) förmögenhetsskatt, i fråga om skatt som utgår på grund av 
taxering under 2022 eller tidigare.


Bilaga

(Översättning)

Convention between the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and 
the Government of the Kingdom of Greece for the avoidance of 
double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with 
respect to taxes on income and capital

The Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of 
the Kingdom of Greece,

Desiring to conclude a Convention for the avoidance of double 
taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to 
taxes on income and capital,

Have agreed as follows:

Article I

This Convention applies to persons who are residents of one or 
both of the Contracting States.

Article II

(1) This Convention shall apply to taxes on income and capital 
imposed on behalf of each Contracting State or its political 
subdivisions or local authorities, irrespective of the manner 
in which they are levied.

(2) There shall be regarded as taxes on income and capital all 
taxes imposed on total income, on total capital, or on the 
elements of income or of capital, including taxes on profits 
derived from the alienation of movable or immovable property 
and taxes on the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by 
enterprises.

(3) The existing taxes to which this Convention shall apply 
are, in particular:

(a) In the case of Greece:

(i) the tax on individual incomes (including supplementary 
taxes); and

(ii) the income tax on legal entities (hereinafter referred to 
as "Greek tax").

(b) In the case of Sweden:

(i) the State income tax, including sailors tax and coupon 
tax;

(ii) the tax on public entertainers;

(iii) the communal income tax; and

(iv) the State capital tax (hereinafter referred to as 
"Swedish tax").

(4) This Convention shall also apply to all identical or 
substantially similar taxes which are imposed in addition to, 
or in place of the existing taxes. At the end of each year, 
the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall 
notify to each other any changes which have been made in their 
respective taxation laws.

(5) The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall 
by mutual agreement resolve any doubts which arise as to the 
taxes to which this Convention ought to apply.

Article III

(1) In the present Convention, unless the context otherwise 
requires -

(a) The term "competent authorities" means, in the case of 
Sweden, the Minister of Finance or his authorised 
representative; in the case of Greece, the Minister of Finance 
or his authorized representative;

(b) The term "tax" means Greek tax or Swedish tax, as the 
context requires;

(c) The term "person" includes any body of persons, corporate 
or not corporate;

(d) The term "company" means any body corporate;

(e) (aa) The term "resident" of one of the Contracting States 
means any person who, under the law of that State, is liable 
to taxation therein by reason of his domicile, residence, 
place of management or any other similar criterion; but

(bb) where by reason of the provisions of sub-paragraph (aa) 
above an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, 
then this case shall be solved in accordance with the 
following rules:

a) He shall be deemed to be a resident of the State in which 
he has a permanent home available to him. If he has a 
permanent home available to him in both Contracting States, he 
shall be deemed to be a resident of the State with which his 
personal and economic relations are closest (hereinafter 
referred to as his centre of vital interests);

b) If the State in which he has his centre of vital interests 
cannot be determined, or if he has not a permanent home 
available to him in either State, he shall be deemed to be a 
resident of the State in which he has an habitual abode;

c) If he has an habitual abode in both Contracting States or 
in neither of them, he shall be deemed to be a resident of the 
Contracting State of which he is a national;

d) If he is a national of both Contracting States or of 
neither of them, the competent authorities of the States shall 
determine the question by mutual agreement.

(cc) Where by reason of the provisions of sub-paragraph (aa) 
above a legal person is a resident of both Contracting States, 
then it shall be deemed to be a resident of the State in which 
its place of effective management is situated. The same 
provision shall apply to partnerships and associations which 
are not legal persons under the national laws by which they 
are governed.

(f) The terms "resident of one of the Contracting States" and 
"resident of the other Contracting State" mean a person who is 
a resident of Greece or a person who is a resident of Sweden, 
as the context requires;

(g) The terms "Greek enterprise" and "Swedish enterprise" mean 
respectively an industrial or commercial enterprise or under-
taking carried on by a resident of Greece and an industrial or 
commercial enterprise or undertaking carried on by a resident 
of Sweden, and the terms "enterprise of one of the Contracting 
States" and "enterprise of the other Contracting State" mean a 
Greek enterprise or a Swedish enterprise, as the context 
requires;

(h) The term "industrial or commercial profits" includes rents 
or royalties in respect of cinematograph including television 
films;

(i) (aa) The term "permanent establishment" means a fixed 
place of business in which the business of the enterprise is 
wholly or partly carried on.

(bb) A permanent establishment shall include especially:

a) a place of management; 

b) a branch;

c) an office;

d) a factory;

e) a workshop;

f) a mine, quarry or other place of extraction of natural 
resources;

g) a building site or construction or assembly project which 
exists for more than twelve months.

(cc) The term "permanent establishment" shall not be deemed to 
include:

a) the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage, 
display or delivery of goods or merchandise belonging to the 
enterprise;

b) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise 
belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of storage, 
display or delivery;

c) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise 
belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of 
processing by another enterprise;

d) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the 
purpose of purchasing goods or merchandise, or for collecting 
information, for the enterprise;

e) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the 
purpose of advertising, for the supply of information, for 
scientific research or for similar activities which have a 
preparatory or auxiliary character, for the enterprise.

(dd) A person acting in one of the Contracting States on 
behalf of an enterprise of the other Contracting State - other 
than an agent of an independent status to whom sub-paragraph 
(ee) applies - shall be deemed to be a permanent establishment 
in the first-mentioned State if he has, and habitually 
exercises in that State, an authority to conclude contracts in 
the name of the enterprise, unless his activities are limited 
to the purchase of goods or merchandise for the enterprise.

(ee) An enterprise of one of the Contracting States shall not 
be deemed to have a permanent establishment in the other 
Contracting State merely because it carries on business in 
that other State through a broker, general commission agent or 
any other agent of an independent status, where such persons 
are acting in the ordinary course of their business.

(ff) The fact that a company which is a resident of one of the 
Contracting States controls or is controlled by a company 
which is a resident of the other Contracting State, or which 
carries on business in that other State (whether through a 
permanent establishment or otherwise), shall not of itself 
constitute either company a permanent establishment of the 
other.

(j) The term "international traffic" includes traffic between 
places in one country in the course of a voyage which extends 
over more than one country.

(2) In the application of the provisions of the present Con-
vention by one of the Contracting States any term not 
otherwise defined shall, unless the context otherwise 
requires, have the meaning which it has under the laws in 
force in that State relating to the taxes which are the 
subject of the present Convention.

Article IV

(1) The profits of an enterprise of one of the Contracting 
States shall be taxable only in that State unless the 
enterprise carries on business in the other Contracting State 
through a permanent establishment situated therein. If the 
enterprise carries on business as aforesaid, tax may be 
imposed in the other State on the profits of the enterprise 
but only on so much of them as is attributable to that 
permanent establishment.

(2) Where an enterprise of one of the Contracting States 
carries on business in the other Contracting State through a 
permanent establishment situated therein, there shall in each 
State be attributed to that permanent establishment the 
profits which it might be expected to make if it were a 
distinct and separate enterprise engaged in the same or 
similar activities under the same or similar conditions and 
dealing quite independently with the enterprise of which it is 
a permanent establishment.

(3) In the determination of the profits of a permanent 
establishment, there shall be allowed as deductions expenses 
which are incurred for the purposes of the permanent 
establishment, including executive and general administrative 
expenses so incurred, whether in the Contracting State in 
which the permanent establishment is situated or elsewhere.

(4) In so far as it has been customary in one of the 
Contracting States to determine the profits to be attributed 
to a permanent establishment on the basis of an apportionment 
of the total profits of the enterprise to its various parts, 
nothing in paragraph (2) of this Article shall preclude such 
Contracting State from determining the profits to be taxed by 
such an apportionment as may be customary; the method of 
apportionment adopted shall, however, be such that the result 
shall be in accordance with the principles laid down in this 
Article.

(5) No profits shall be attributed to a permanent 
establishment by reason of the mere purchase by that permanent 
establishment of goods or merchandise for the enterprise.

(6) For the purposes of the preceding paragraphs, the profits 
to be attributed to the permanent establishment shall be 
determined by the same method year by year unless there is 
good and sufficient reason to the contrary.

Article V

Where

(a) an enterprise of one of the Contracting States 
participates directly or indirectly in the management, control 
or capital of an enterprise of the other Contracting State, or

(b) the same persons participate directly or indirectly in the 
management, control or capital of an enterprise of one of the 
Contracting States and an enterprise of the other Contracting 
State,

and in either case conditions are made or imposed between the 
two enterprises in their commercial or financial relations 
which differ from those which would be made between 
independent enterprises, then any profits which would, but for 
those conditions, have accrued to one of the enterprises, but, 
by reason of those conditions, have not so accrued, may be 
included in the profits of that enterprise and taxed 
accordingly.

Article VI

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing Articles 
of this Convention, income derived from the operation in 
international traffic of ships registered in one of the 
Contracting States shall be exempt from tax in the other 
Contracting State, unless the enterprise is a resident of that 
other State; in such event the income may be taxed in the 
last-mentioned State.

(2) Income from the operation of aircraft in international 
traffic shall be taxable only in the Contracting State in 
which the place of effective management of the enterprise is 
situated.

Article VII

(1) Dividends paid by a company which is a resident of Sweden 
to a resident of Greece shall be exempt from Swedish tax.

(2) Dividends paid by a company which is a resident of Greece 
to a resident of Sweden shall in Greece be subject to Greek 
income tax provided that such dividends are deducted from the 
amount of the company's total net income subject to the income 
tax on legal entities.

(3) Dividends paid by a company which is a resident of Greece 
to a company which is a resident of Sweden shall be exempt 
from Swedish tax. This exemption shall not apply unless in 
accordance with the laws of Sweden the dividends would have 
been exempt from Swedish tax if the first-mentioned company 
had been a resident of Sweden and not a resident of Greece.

(4) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article shall not apply 
where a resident of one of the Contracting States has a 
permanent establishment in the other Contracting State and 
such dividends are directly associated with the business 
carried on through such permanent establishment; in such event 
Article IV of this Convention is applicable.

Article VIII

(1) Interest arising in one of the Contracting States and paid 
to a resident of the other Contracting State shall be taxable 
in that other State.

(2) Nevertheless, a Contracting State in which interest arises 
which is paid to a resident of the other Contracting State 
shall retain the right under its own law to tax such interest. 
If it exercises such right, the rate of the tax which it 
charges may not exceed 10 per cent on the amount of the 
interest. The competent authorities of the two States shall by 
mutual agreement settle the mode of application of such 
limitation.

(3) The term "interest" employed in this Article means income 
from Government securities, bonds or debentures, whether or 
not secured by mortgage and whether or not carrying a right to 
participate in profits, and debt-claims of every kind, as well 
as all other income assimilated by the taxation law to income 
from money lent.

(4) The provisions of the foregoing paragraphs shall not apply 
if the recipient of the interest, being a resident of one of 
the Contracting States, has in the other Contracting State in 
which the interest arises a permanent establishment with which 
the debt-claim from which the interest arises is effectively 
connected. In such a case, Article IV of this Convention shall 
apply.

(5) Interest shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting State 
when the payer is that State itself, a political subdivision 
of that State or a resident of that State. Where, however, the 
person paying the interest, whether he is a resident of one of 
the Contracting States or not, possesses in one of the 
Contracting States a permanent establishment for the require-
ments of which the loan on which the interest is paid was 
effected, and such interest is borne by such permanent 
establishment, then such interest shall be deemed to arise in 
the Contracting State in which the permanent establishment is 
situated.

(6) Where, owing to a special relationship between the payer 
and the recipient or between either of them and some other 
person, the amount of interest paid, having regard to the 
indebtedness in respect of which it is paid, exceeds the 
amount which would have been agreed upon by the payer and the 
recipient in the absence of such relationship, the provisions 
of this Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. 
In such a case, the excess part of the interest shall be 
taxable in accordance with the laws of the two Contracting 
States due regard being had to the other provisions of this 
Convention.

Article IX

(1) Royalties arising in one of the Contracting States and 
paid to a resident of the other Contracting State shall be 
taxable in that other State.

(2) Nevertheless, a Contracting State in which royalties arise 
which are paid to a resident of the other Contracting State 
shall retain the right under its own law to tax such 
royalties. If it exercises such right, the rate of the tax 
which it charges may not exceed 5 per cent of the gross amount 
of the royalties. The competent authorities of the two States 
shall by mutual agreement settle the mode of application of 
such limitation.

(3) The term "royalties" employed in this Article means pay-
ments of any kind received as consideration for the use of, or 
the right to use, any copyright of literary, artistic or 
scientific work, any patent, trade mark, design or model, 
plan, secret process or formula, or for the use of, or the 
right to use, industrial, commercial or scientific equipment, 
or for information concerning industrial, commercial or 
scientific experience, but does not include any royalty or 
other amount paid in respect of the operation of a mine or 
quarry or of any other extraction of natural resources or in 
respect of cinematograph in-cluding television films.

(4) Profits from the alienation of any property or rights 
mentioned in paragraph (3) shall be taxable only in the 
Contracting State of which the alienator is a resident.

(5) The provisions of paragraphs (1), (2) and (4) shall not 
apply if the recipient of the royalties, being a resident of 
one of the Contracting States, has in the Contracting State in 
which the royalties arise a permanent establishment with which 
the right giving rise to the royalties is effectively connec-
ted. In such a case, Article IV of this Convention shall 
apply.

(6) Where, owing to a special relationship between the payer 
and the recipient or between either of them and some other 
person, the amount of the royalties paid, having regard to the 
use or right for which they are paid, exceeds the amount which 
would have been agreed upon by the payer and the recipient in 
the absence of such relationship, the provisions of this 
Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such 
a case, the excess part of the payments shall be taxable in 
accordance with the laws of the two Contracting States due 
regard being had to the other provisions of this Convention.

Article X

(1) Income from immovable property may be taxed in the 
Contracting State in which such property is situated.

(2) The term "immovable property" shall be defined in 
accordance with the laws of the Contracting State in which the 
property in question is situated. The term shall in any case 
include property accessory to immovable property, livestock 
and equipment of agricultural and forestry enterprises, rights 
to which the provisions of general law respecting landed pro-
perty apply, usufruct of immovable property and rights to 
variable or fixed payments as consideration for the working of 
mineral deposits, sources and other natural resources; ships, 
boats and aircraft shall not be regarded as immovable 
property.

(3) The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply 
to income derived from the direct use or from the letting of 
immovable property or the use in any other form of such 
property, including income from agricultural or forestry 
enterprises. They shall likewise apply to profits from the 
alienation of immovable property.

(4) The provisions of paragraphs (1) to (3) above shall also 
apply to the income from immovable property of any enterprises 
other than agricultural or forestry enterprises and to income 
from immovable property used for the performance of 
professional services.

Article XI

A resident of one of the Contracting States shall be exempt in 
the other Contracting State from tax on gains from the sale, 
transfer, or exchange of capital assets other than immovable 
property, unless he has a permanent establishment in that 
other State and the gains are directly associated with the 
business carried on through such permanent establishment.

Article XII

Income derived by a resident of one of the Contracting States 
in respect of professional services or other independent 
activities of a similar character shall be taxable only in 
that Contracting State unless he has a fixed base regularly 
available to him in the other Contracting State for the 
purpose of performing his activities. If he has such a fixed 
base, such part of that income as is attributable to that base 
may be taxed in that other Contracting State.

Article XIII

(1) Subject to the provisions of Articles XIV, XV and XVI 
salaries, wages and other similar remuneration derived by a 
resident of one of the Contracting States in respect of an 
employment shall be taxable only in that State unless the 
employment is exercised in the other Contracting State. If the 
employment is so exercised, such remuneration as is derived 
therefrom may be taxed in that other State.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) above, re-
muneration derived by a resident of one of the Contracting 
States in respect of an employment exercised in the other 
Contracting State shall be taxable only in the first-mentioned 
State if:

(a) the recipient is present in the other State for a period 
or periods not exceeding in the aggregate 183 days in the 
taxable year concerned, and

(b) the remuneration is paid by or on behalf of an employer 
who is not a resident of the other State, and

(c) the remuneration is not deducted from the profits of a 
permanent establishment or a fixed base which the employer has 
in the other State.

(3) Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, 
remuneration for personal services performed aboard: 

(a) a ship in international traffic and registered in one of 
the Contracting States may be taxed in that Contracting State 
unless the enterprise is a resident of the other State; in 
such event the income may be taxed in the last-mentioned 
State; and

(b) an aircraft in international traffic may be taxed in the 
Contracting State in which the place of effective management 
of the enterprise is situated.

Article XIV

(1) Remuneration, including pensions, paid by or out of funds 
created by one of the Contracting States or a political 
subdivision or a local authority thereof to any individual in 
respect of services rendered to that State or subdivision or 
local authority thereof in the discharge of functions of a 
governmental nature may be taxed in that State. The same shall 
apply as regards other pensions paid by the State as well as 
pensions paid by social insurance institutions and similar 
organisations.

(2) The provisions of Articles XIII, XV and XVI shall apply to 
remuneration and pensions in respect of services rendered in 
connection with any trade or business carried on by one of the 
Contracting States or a political subdivision or a local 
authority thereof.

Article XV

Directors' fees and similar payments derived by a resident of 
one of the Contracting States in his capacity as a member of 
the board of directors of a company which is a resident of the 
other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

Article XVI

Subject to the provisions of paragraph (1) of Article XIV pen-
sions and other similar payments paid in consideration of past 
employment shall be taxable only in the Contracting State of 
which the recipient is a resident.

Article XVII

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Convention, income 
derived by public entertainers, such as theatre, motion 
picture, radio or television artists, and musicians, and by 
athletes, from their personal activities as such may be taxed 
in the Contracting State in which these activities are 
exercised.

Article XVIII

(1) Any annuity, derived from sources within Sweden by an 
individual who is a resident of Greece, shall be exempt from 
Swedish tax.

(2) Any annuity, derived from sources within Greece by an 
individual who is a resident of Sweden, shall be exempt from 
Greek tax.

(3) The term "annuity" means a stated sum payable, under an 
obligation, periodically at stated times during life or during 
a specified or ascertainable period of time.

Article XIX

A professor or teacher of an establishment for higher 
education or scientific research in one of the Contracting 
States, who receives remuneration for teaching or for carrying 
out advanced study or research, during a period of temporary 
residence not exceeding two years, at a university, college or 
other establishment for higher education or for research in 
the other Contracting State, shall be exempt from tax in that 
other State in respect of that remuneration, provided that 
such establishment belongs to the State or to non profit-
making legal entities under the Public or Private law.

Article XX

(1) Payments which a student or business apprentice from one 
of the Contracting States who is present in the other 
Contracting State solely for the purpose of his education or 
training receives for the purpose of his maintenance, 
education or training, shall not be taxed in that other State, 
provided that such payments are made to him from sources 
outside that other State.

(2) An individual from one of the Contracting States who is 
present in the other Contracting State solely as a student at 
a university, college or school in the other State or as a 
business apprentice, shall not be taxed in that other State 
for a period not exceeding three consecutive taxable years in 
respect of remuneration from employment in such other State, 
provided that

(a) the remuneration constitutes earnings necessary for his 
maintenance and education, and

(b) the said remuneration does not exceed in the taxable year 
4.000 Swedish crowns or the equivalent thereof in the currency 
of Greece as the case may be.

Article XXI

The items of income not expressly mentioned in the foregoing 
Articles of the Convention shall be taxable only in the 
Contracting State of which the recipient is a resident.

Article XXII

Where taxes on capital are imposed by one or other or both of 
the Contracting States the following provisions shall apply:

(a) Capital represented by immovable property, as defined in 
paragraph (2) of Article X, may be taxed in the Contracting 
State in which such property is situated.

(b) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (a) above, capital 
represented by assets forming part of the business property 
employed in a permanent establishment of an enterprise, or by 
assets pertaining to a fixed base used for the performance of 
professional services, may be taxed in the Contracting State 
in which the permanent establishment or fixed base is 
situated.

(c) All other elements of capital of a resident of one of the 
Contracting States shall be taxable only in that State.

Article XXIII

(1) Subject to the provisions of the law of Greece regarding 
the allowance as a credit against Greek tax of tax payable in 
a territory outside Greece, Swedish tax payable under the laws 
of Sweden and in accordance with this Convention, whether 
directly or by deduction, in respect of income from sources 
within Sweden shall be allowed as a credit against any Greek 
tax payable in respect of that income.

(2) Income from sources within Greece which in accordance with 
this Convention may be taxed in Greece either directly or by 
deduction, shall be exempt from Swedish tax, provided that

a) where such income is

(i) a dividend paid by a company being a resident of Greece to 
a person resident of Sweden, not being a company which is 
exempt from Swedish tax according to the provisions of 
paragraph (3) of Article VII, or

(ii) any interest to which paragraph (2) of Article VIII 
applies and which is paid to a resident of Sweden, or

(iii) any royalty to which paragraph (2) of Article IX applies 
and which is paid to a resident of Sweden,

Swedish tax shall be charged on the gross amount of such 
income, but the amount of Greek income tax appropriate to that 
income shall be allowed as a credit against any Swedish tax 
payable in respect of that income;

b) when the Greek income tax appropriate to the dividend, the 
interest or the royalty, as the case may be, has been wholly 
relieved or reduced for a limited period of time, the credit 
against Swedish tax in respect of such income shall be allowed 
in an amount equal to the Greek income tax which would have 
been appropriate to the dividend, the interest or the royalty 
if no such relief had been given or no such reduction had been 
allowed;

c) where interest arising in Greece is paid to a resident of 
Sweden during the period of the first ten taxable years of the 
application of the Convention, the credit against Swedish tax 
payable in respect of that interest shall, notwithstanding the 
provisions of sub-paragraphs a) and b), be allowed in an 
amount equal to ten per cent of the amount of such interest.

(3) If, in accordance with Article XXII, capital belonging to 
a person resident of Sweden may be taxed in Greece, such 
capital shall be exempt from Swedish tax.

(4) The graduated rate of Swedish tax to be imposed on 
residents of Sweden may be calculated as though income or 
capital exempted under this Convention were included in the 
amount of the total income or capital.

Article XXIV

(1) Where under the provisions of this Convention a resident 
of Greece is exempt or entitled to relief from Swedish tax, 
similar exemption or relief shall be applied to the undivided 
estate of a deceased person in so far as one or more of the 
beneficiaries is a resident of Greece.

(2) Swedish tax on the undivided estate of a deceased person 
shall, in so far as the income accrues to a beneficiary who is 
resident in Greece, be allowed as a credit under Article 
XXIII.

Article XXV 

(1) The nationals of one of the Contracting States shall not 
be subjected in the other Contracting State to any taxation or 
any requirement connected therewith which is other or more 
burdensome than the taxation and connected requirements to 
which nationals of that other State in the same circumstances 
are or may be subjected.

(2) The term "nationals" means -

(a) in relation to Greece, all Greek citizens and all legal 
persons, partnerships and associations deriving their status 
as such from the law in force in Greece,

(b) in relation to Sweden, all Swedish subjects and all legal 
persons, partnerships and associations deriving their status 
as such from the law in force in Sweden.

(3) The taxation on a permanent establishment which an 
enterprise of one of the Contracting States has in the other 
Contracting State shall not be less favourably levied in that 
other State than the taxation levied on enterprises of that 
other State carrying on the same activities.

This provision shall not be construed as obliging one of the 
Contracting States to grant to residents of the other 
Contracting State any personal allowances, reliefs and 
reductions for taxation purposes on account of civil status or 
family responsibilities which it grants to its own residents.

(4) Enterprises of one of the Contracting States, the capital 
of which is wholly or partly owned or controlled, directly or 
indirectly, by one or more residents of the other Contracting 
State, shall not be subjected in the first-mentioned State to 
any taxation or any requirement connected therewith which is 
other or more burdensome than the taxation and connected 
requirements to which other similar enterprises of that first-
mentioned State are or may be subjected.

(5) In this Article the term "taxation" means taxes of every 
kind and description.

Article XXVI

The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the 
right to more extensive exemptions which are granted to 
diplomatic or consular officials by virtue of the general 
rules of international law or by special agreements. In so far 
as, under this system of more extensive exemption, income and 
capital are not subject to tax in the receiving State, the 
right to taxation shall be reserved to the State which such 
officials represent.

Article XXVII

The competent authorities of the Contracting States may 
exchange such information (being information which is at their 
disposal under their respective taxation laws in the normal 
course of administration) as is necessary for carrying out the 
provisions of the present Convention or for the prevention of 
fraud or for the administration of statutory provisions 
against legal avoidance in relation to the taxes which are the 
subject of the present Convention. Any information so 
exchanged shall be treated as secret and shall not be 
disclosed to any persons other than those, including a court, 
concerned with the assessment and collection of the taxes or 
the determination of appeals in relation thereto. No informa-
tion as aforesaid shall be exchanged which would disclose any 
trade, business, industrial or professional secret or trade 
process.

Information as aforesaid may be exchanged ex officio or, in 
particular cases, on demand. The competent authorities of the 
Contracting States shall consult together to determine the 
information to be exchanged ex officio.

Article XXVIII

(1) Where a taxpayer shows proof that the action of the tax 
authorities of either Contracting State has resulted, or will 
result, in taxation contrary to the provisions of the present 
Convention, he shall be entitled to present the facts to the 
competent authority of the Contracting State of which he is a 
resident. Such a claim shall be filed before an appeal against 
the taxation in dispute is lodged with a Greek tax court. 
Should the claim be upheld, the competent authority to which 
the facts are so presented shall undertake to come to an 
agreement with the competent authority of the other 
Contracting State with a view to avoidance of the taxation in 
question.

(2) Should any difficulty or doubt arise as to the 
interpretation or application of the present Convention, the 
competent authorities of the Contracting States shall settle 
the question by mutual agreement.

Article XXIX

The following agreements between Greece and Sweden shall not 
have effect for any period for which the present Convention 
has effect, that is to say,

(a) the agreement dated 19th November, 1931, for the 
reciprocal exemption from income tax in certain cases of 
profits accruing from the business of shipping;

(b) the agreement dated 27th May, 1954, for the reciprocal ex-
emption from taxes of profits accruing from the business of 
air transport.

Article XXX

(1) The present Convention shall be ratified by the 
Contracting States in accordance with their respective 
constitutional and legal requirements.

(2) The instruments of ratification shall be exchanged at 
Stockholm as soon as possible.

(3) Upon exchange of ratifications the present Convention 
shall have effect in respect of income derived on or after 1st 
January in the calendar year in which the exchange of 
ratifications takes place; and, as regards the Swedish State 
capital tax, in respect of tax which is assessed in or after 
the calendar year next following that in which the exchange of 
ratifications takes place.

Article XXXI

The present Convention shall continue in effect indefinitely 
but either of the Contracting Governments may, on or before 
30th June in any calendar year not earlier than the year 1965, 
give to the other Contracting Government, through diplomatic 
channels, written notice of termination and, in such event, 
the present Convention shall cease to be effective in respect 
of income derived on or after 1st January in the calendar year 
next following that in which such notice is given; and as 
regards capital tax, in respect of tax assessed in or after 
the second calendar year following that in which such notice 
is given.

In witness whereof the undersigned being duly authorized 
thereto have signed the present Convention and have affixed 
thereto their seals.

Done at Athens, this 6th day of October 1961 in duplicate in 
the English language.

 

For the Kingdom of Sweden

F. Stackelberg

For the Kingdom of Greece

M. Pesmazoglou

Avtal mellan Konungariket Sveriges regering och Konungariket 
Greklands regering för undvikande av dubbelbeskattning och 
förhindrande av skatteflykt beträffande skatter å inkomst och 
förmögenhet

Konungariket Sveriges regering och Konungariket Greklands 
regering hava

föranledda av önskan att ingå ett avtal för undvikande av 
dubbelbeskattning och förhindrande av skatteflykt beträffande 
skatter å inkomst och förmögenhet,

överenskommit om följande bestämmelser:

Artikel I

Detta avtal är tillämpligt å personer, som äga hemvist i en av 
de avtalsslutande staterna eller i båda staterna.

Artikel II

§ 1. Avtalet är tillämpligt å skatter å inkomst och 
förmögenhet, vilka uppbäras av envar av de avtalsslutande 
staterna eller av dess politiska underavdelningar eller lokala 
myndigheter, oberoende av sättet för skattens uttagande.

§ 2. Med skatter å inkomst och förmögenhet förstås alla 
skatter, som utgå å inkomst eller å förmögenhet i dess helhet 
eller å delar av inkomst eller förmögenhet, därunder inbe-
gripna skatter å vinst genom avyttring av lös eller fast 
egendom samt skatter å ett företags totala löneutbetalningar.

§ 3. De för närvarande utgående skatter, å vilka avtalet skall 
äga tilllämpning, äro särskilt:

1) Beträffande Grekland:

a) Skatten å fysiska personers inkomst, tilläggsskatter däri 
inbegripna, samt

b) inkomstskatten å juridiska personer; 

skatt av sådant slag benämnes i det följande "grekisk skatt".

2) Beträffande Sverige:

a) Den statliga inkomstskatten, sjömansskatten och 
kupongskatten däri inbegripna;

b) bevillningsavgifterna för särskilda förmåner och 
rättigheter;

c) den kommunala inkomstskatten, samt

d) den statliga förmögenhetsskatten; 

skatt av sådant slag benämnes i det följande "svensk skatt".

§ 4. Avtalet skall likaledes tilllämpas å skatter av samma 
eller i huvudsak likartat slag, vilka framdeles uttagas vid 
sidan av eller i stället för de för närvarande utgående 
skatterna. De behöriga myndigheterna i de båda avtalsslutande 
staterna skola vid utgången av varje år meddela varandra 
ändringar i skattelagstiftningen.

§ 5. De behöriga myndigheterna i de båda avtalsslutande 
staterna skola i samförstånd avgöra uppkommande tvivelsmål 
rörande vilka skatter som inbegripas under avtalet.

Artikel III

§ 1. Där icke sammanhanget annat föranleder, skola i detta 
avtal följande uttryck hava nedan angiven betydelse:

a) Uttrycket "behöriga myndigheter" åsyftar för Sveriges 
vidkommande finansministern eller hans befullmäktigade ombud 
och för Greklands vidkommande finansministern eller hans 
befullmäktigade ombud.

b) Uttrycket "skatt" åsyftar grekisk skatt eller svensk skatt, 
alltefter som sammanhanget kräver.

c) Uttrycket "person" inbegriper varje sammanslutning av 
personer, antingen denna utgör en juridisk person eller icke.

d) Uttrycket "bolag" åsyftar varje slag av juridisk person.

e) I) Uttrycket "person med hemvist" i en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna åsyftar varje person, som enligt den statens 
lagstiftning är underkastad beskattning därstädes på grund av 
hemvist, bosättning, plats för företagsledning eller varje 
annan liknande omständighet.

II) Då på grund av bestämmelserna i punkt I) ovan en fysisk 
person äger hemvist i båda avtalsslutande staterna, skall 
följande gälla:

1) Han skall anses äga hemvist i den stat, i vilken han har 
ett hem som stadigvarande står till hans förfogande. Om han 
har ett sådant hem i båda avtalsslutande staterna, anses han 
äga hemvist i den stat, med vilken han har de starkaste 
personliga och ekonomiska förbindelserna (här nedan betecknat 
såsom centrum för levnadsintressena).

2) Om det icke kan avgöras, i vilken stat centrum för levnads-
intressena befinner sig, eller om han icke i någondera staten 
har ett hem, som stadigvarande står till hans förfogande, 
anses han äga hemvist i den stat, där han stadigvarande 
vistas.

3) Om han stadigvarande vistas i båda avtalsslutande staterna 
eller om han icke vistas stadigvarande i någon av dem, anses 
han äga hemvist i den avtalsslutande stat, i vilken han är 
medborgare.

4) Om han är medborgare i båda avtalsslutande staterna eller 
om han icke är medborgare i någon av dem, skola de behöriga 
myndigheterna i de båda staterna avgöra frågan genom 
överenskommelse.

III) Då på grund av bestämmelserna i punkt I) ovan en juridisk 
person äger hemvist i båda avtalsslutande staterna, anses dess 
hemvist förefinnas i den stat, där dess verkliga ledning är 
belägen. Detsamma gäller sådana bolag och andra 
sammanslutningar, vilka enligt vederbörande stats lagstiftning 
icke äro juridiska personer.

f) Uttrycken "person med hemvist i en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna" och "person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande 
staten" åsyfta en person med hemvist i Grekland eller en 
person med hemvist i Sverige, alltefter som sammanhanget 
kräver.

g) Uttrycken "grekiskt företag" och "svenskt företag" åsyfta 
ett rörelseidkande företag, som bedrives av en person med 
hemvist i Grekland respektive ett rörelseidkande företag, som 
bedrives av en person med hemvist i Sverige; uttrycken 
"företag i en av de avtalsslutande staterna" och "företag i 
den andra avtalsslutande staten" åsyfta ett grekiskt företag 
eller ett svenskt företag, alltefter som sammanhanget kräver.

h) Uttrycket "inkomst av rörelse" inbegriper hyresavgifter 
eller royalty för kinematografisk film ävensom 
televisionsfilm.

i) I) Med uttrycket "fast driftställe" förstås en 
stadigvarande affärsanordning, i vilken företagets verksamhet 
helt eller delvis utövas.

II) Såsom fast driftställe anses särskilt: 

1) plats för företagsledning,

2) filial,

3) kontor,

4) fabrik,

5) verkstad,

6) gruva, stenbrott eller annan plats för utnyttjandet av 
naturtillgångar,

7) plats för byggnads-, anläggnings- eller 
installationsarbete, som varar mer än tolv månader.

III) Uttrycket "fast driftställe" skall icke anses innefatta:

1) användningen av anordningar, avsedda uteslutande för 
lagring, utställning eller utlämnande av företaget tillhöriga 
varor,

2) innehavet av ett företaget tillhörigt varulager, avsett 
uteslutande för lagring, utställning eller utlämnande,

3) innehavet av ett företaget tillhörigt varulager, avsett 
uteslutande för bearbetning eller förädling genom ett annat 
företags försorg,

4) innehavet av en stadigvarande affärsanordning, avsedd 
uteslutande för inköp av varor eller införskaffande av 
upplysningar för företagets räkning,

5) innehavet av en stadigvarande affärsanordning, avsedd 
uteslutande för att för företagets räkning ombesörja reklam, 
meddela upplysningar, bedriva vetenskaplig forskning eller 
utöva liknande verksamhet, under förutsättning att 
verksamheten är av förberedande eller biträdande art.

IV) En person, som är verksam i en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna för ett företag i den andra avtalsslutande staten - 
härunder inbegripes icke sådan oberoende representant som 
avses i punkt V) - behandlas såsom ett fast driftställe i den 
förstnämnda staten om han innehar och i den förstnämnda staten 
regelbundet använder en fullmakt att sluta avtal i företagets 
namn samt verksamheten icke begränsas till inköp av varor för 
företagets räkning.

V) Ett företag i en av de avtalsslutande staterna anses icke 
hava ett fast driftställe i den andra avtalsslutande staten 
allenast på den grund, att företaget uppehåller 
affärsförbindelser i den andra staten genom förmedling av en 
mäklare, kommissionär eller annan fullständigt oberoende 
representant, under förutsättning att dessa personer därvid 
fullgöra uppdrag, vilka tillhöra deras vanliga affärs-
verksamhet.

VI) Den omständigheten, att ett bolag med hemvist i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna kontrollerar eller kontrolleras av ett 
bolag, som har sitt hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten 
eller som uppehåller affärsförbindelser i denna andra stat 
(antingen genom ett fast driftställe eller annorledes), skall 
icke i och för sig medföra att någotdera bolaget betraktas 
såsom ett fast driftställe för det andra bolaget.

j) Uttrycket "internationell trafik" inbegriper trafik som 
utövas mellan orter i ett och samma land såsom ett led i 
trafik mellan två eller flera länder.

§ 2. Då en av de avtalsslutande staterna tillämpar 
bestämmelserna i detta avtal, skall, såvitt icke sammanhanget 
annorlunda kräver, varje däri förekommande uttryck, vars 
innebörd icke särskilt angivits, anses hava den betydelse, som 
uttrycket har enligt gällande lagar inom den ifrågavarande 
staten rörande sådana skatter, som äro föremål för avtalet.

Artikel IV

§ 1. Inkomst av rörelse, åtnjuten av ett företag i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna, må beskattas allenast i denna stat, 
såvida icke företaget bedriver rörelse i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten från ett där beläget fast driftställe. 
Om företaget bedriver rörelse på nyss angivet sätt, äger den 
andra avtalsslutande staten beskatta företagets inkomst men 
endast så stor del därav, som är hänförlig till det fasta 
driftstället.

§ 2. Om ett företag i en av de avtalsslutande staterna 
bedriver rörelse i den andra avtalsslutande staten från ett 
där beläget fast driftställe, skall i vardera staten till det 
fasta driftstället hänföras den inkomst av rörelse, som 
driftstället kan antagas skola hava åtnjutit, därest 
driftstället varit ett fristående företag med samma eller 
liknande verksamhet, bedriven under samma eller liknande 
villkor, samt driftstället självständigt avslutat affärer med 
det företag, till vilket driftstället hör.

§ 3. Vid bestämmandet av det fasta driftställets inkomst av 
rörelse skall avdrag medgivas för alla kostnader som uppkommit 
för det fasta driftställets räkning, härunder inbegripna 
kostnader för företagets ledning och allmänna förvaltning, 
oavsett om kostnaderna uppkommit i den avtalsslutande stat där 
det fasta driftstället är beläget eller annorstädes.

§ 4. Vad i § 2 av denna artikel stadgas skall emellertid - i 
den mån i en av de avtalsslutande staterna inkomst hänförlig 
till ett fast driftställe brukat bestämmas på grundval av en 
fördelning av företagets hela inkomst på de olika delarna av 
företaget - icke hindra att i denna avtalsslutande stat den 
skattepliktiga inkomsten bestämmes genom ett dylikt brukligt 
förfarande. Förfarandet skall dock vara sådant att resultatet 
står i överensstämmelse med de i denna artikel angivna prin-
ciperna.

§ 5. Inkomst skall icke anses hänförlig till ett fast 
driftställe allenast av den anledningen att det fasta 
driftstället inköper varor för företagets räkning.

§ 6. Vid tillämpningen av föregående paragrafer skall inkomst 
hänförlig till det fasta driftstället bestämmas genom samma 
förfarande år från år såvida icke särskilda förhållanden annat 
föranleda.

Artikel V

I fall då

a) ett företag i en av de avtalsslutande staterna direkt eller 
indirekt deltager i ledningen eller övervakningen av ett 
företag i den andra avtalsslutande staten eller äger del i 
detta företags kapital, eller

b) samma personer direkt eller indirekt deltaga i ledningen 
eller övervakningen av såväl ett företag i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna som ett företag i den andra avtals-
slutande staten eller äga del i båda dessa företags kapital,

skall iakttagas följande. Om mellan företagen i fråga om 
handel eller andra ekonomiska förbindelser avtalas eller 
föreskrivas villkor, som avvika från dem som skulle hava 
avtalats mellan två av varandra oberoende företag, må alla 
vinster, som skulle hava tillkommit det ena företaget om sagda 
villkor icke funnits men som på grund av villkoren i fråga 
icke tillkommit detta företag, inräknas i detta företags 
inkomster och beskattas i överensstämmelse därmed.

Artikel VI

§ 1. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i föregående artiklar av 
detta avtal skall inkomst, som förvärvas genom utövande av 
sjöfart i internationell trafik medelst fartyg registrerade i 
en av de avtalsslutande staterna, vara undantagen från 
beskattning i den andra avtalsslutande staten, såvida icke 
företaget äger hemvist i denna andra stat; i dylikt fall må 
den sistnämnda staten beskatta inkomsten.

§ 2. Inkomst, som förvärvas genom utövande av luftfart i 
internationell trafik, skall beskattas allenast i den 
avtalsslutande stat, i vilken företaget har sin verkliga 
ledning.

Artikel VII

§ 1. Utdelning från ett bolag med hemvist i Sverige till en 
person med hemvist i Grekland skall vara undantagen från 
svensk skatt.

§ 2. Utdelning från ett bolag med hemvist i Grekland till en 
person med hemvist i Sverige skall i Grekland vara underkastad 
grekisk inkomstskatt under förutsättning att utdelningen 
avdrages från det belopp av bolagets sammanlagda nettoinkomst, 
som är föremål för den grekiska inkomstskatten å juridiska 
personer.

§ 3. Utdelning från ett bolag med hemvist i Grekland till ett 
bolag med hemvist i Sverige skall vara undantagen från svensk 
skatt. Denna skattebefrielse inträder dock icke med mindre 
förhållandena äro sådana att utdelningen enligt svensk lag 
skulle ha varit undantagen från svensk skatt, om det 
förstnämnda bolaget hade varit att anse som bosatt i Sverige 
och icke i Grekland.

§ 4. Bestämmelserna i §§ 1 och 2 av denna artikel äro icke 
tilllämpliga, om en person med hemvist i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna innehar ett fast driftställe i den 
andra avtalsslutande staten och utdelningen i fråga äger 
direkt samband med den från driftstället bedrivna rörelsen; i 
dylikt fall skall artikel IV av detta avtal äga tillämpning.

Artikel VIII

§ 1. Ränta, som härrör från en av de avtalsslutande staterna 
och utbetalas till en person med hemvist i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten, må beskattas i denna andra stat. 

§ 2. Den avtalsslutande stat, från vilken härrör ränta som 
utbetalas till en person med hemvist i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten, skall dock vara bibehållen vid rätten 
att enligt sin egen lagstiftning beskatta räntan. Utövas denna 
beskattningsrätt, får den påförda skatten icke överstiga 
10 procent av räntans belopp. De behöriga myndigheterna i de 
båda staterna skola träffa överenskommelse om tillämpningen av 
nämnda begränsning.

§ 3. Med uttrycket "ränta" förstås i denna artikel inkomst av 
värdepapper som utfärdats av staten, av obligationer eller 
debentures, antingen desamma utfärdats mot säkerhet i egendom 
eller icke och antingen de representera en rätt till andel i 
vinst eller icke, samt av varje annat slags fordran ävensom 
all annan inkomst, vilken enligt skattelagstiftningen 
jämställes med inkomst av försträckning.

§ 4. Bestämmelserna i föregående paragrafer äro icke tillämp-
liga, om den person, som äger hemvist i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna och uppbär räntan, innehar ett fast 
driftställe i den andra avtalsslutande staten varifrån räntan 
härrör och den fordran av vilken räntan härflyter äger 
verkligt samband med det fasta driftstället. I dylikt fall 
skall artikel IV av detta avtal äga tillämpning.

§ 5. Ränta skall anses härröra från en avtalsslutande stat, om 
utbetalaren är staten själv, en politisk underavdelning till 
staten eller en person med hemvist i denna stat. Om den person 
som utbetalar räntan - antingen han äger hemvist i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna eller ej - i en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna innehar ett fast driftställe, för vilket upptagits 
det lån som räntan avser, och räntan bestrides av det fasta 
driftstället, skall räntan dock anses härröra från den 
avtalsslutande stat, i vilken det fasta driftstället är 
beläget.

§ 6. Beträffande sådana fall, då särskilda förbindelser mellan 
utbetalaren och mottagaren eller mellan dem båda och annan 
person föranleda att det utbetalade räntebeloppet med hänsyn 
till den skuld, för vilken räntan erlägges, överstiger det 
belopp som skulle hava avtalats mellan utbetalaren och 
mottagaren om dylika förbindelser icke förelegat, skola be-
stämmelserna i denna artikel gälla allenast för sistnämnda 
belopp. I dylikt fall skall överskjutande räntebelopp 
beskattas i enlighet med lagstiftningen i de båda avtals-
slutande staterna med iakttagande av övriga bestämmelser i 
detta avtal.

Artikel IX

§ 1. Royalty, som härrör från en av de avtalsslutande staterna 
och utbetalas till en person med hemvist i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten, må beskattas i denna andra stat. 

§ 2. Den avtalsslutande stat, från vilken härrör royalty som 
utbetalas till en person med hemvist i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten, skall dock vara bibehållen vid rätten 
att enligt sin egen lagstiftning beskatta royaltyn. Utövas 
denna beskattningsrätt, får den påförda skatten icke överstiga 
5 procent av royaltyns bruttobelopp. De behöriga myndigheterna 
i de båda staterna skola träffa överenskommelse om tillämp-
ningen av nämnda begränsning. 

§ 3. Med uttrycket "royalty" förstås i denna artikel varje 
slag av utbetalning, som uppbäres såsom ersättning för 
upphovsrätt till litterära, konstnärliga eller vetenskapliga 
verk, för nyttjandet av eller rätten att nyttja patent, varu-
märke, mönster eller modell, ritning, hemlig fabrikationsmetod 
eller recept, för nyttjandet av eller rätten att nyttja 
industriell, kommersiell eller vetenskaplig utrustning eller 
för upplysningar om erfarenhetsrön av industriell, kommersiell 
eller vetenskaplig natur; uttrycket omfattar däremot icke 
något slag av royalty eller annat belopp, som utbetalas för 
nyttjandet av gruva, stenbrott eller annan naturtillgång eller 
för kinematografisk film eller televisionsfilm.

§ 4. Inkomst genom avyttring av egendom eller rättighet, som 
avses i § 3, skall beskattas allenast i den avtalsslutande 
stat i vilken säljaren äger hemvist. 

§ 5. Bestämmelserna i §§ 1, 2 och 4 äro icke tillämpliga, om 
den person, som äger hemvist i en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna och som uppbär royaltyn, innehar ett fast driftställe 
i den andra avtalsslutande staten varifrån royaltyn härrör och 
den rättighet av vilken royaltyn härflyter äger verkligt 
samband med det fasta driftstället. I dylikt fall skall 
artikel IV av detta avtal äga tillämpning.

§ 6. Beträffande sådana fall, då särskilda förbindelser mellan 
utbetalaren och mottagaren eller mellan dem båda och annan 
person föranleda att det utbetalade royaltybeloppet med hänsyn 
till det nyttjande eller den rätt, för vilken royaltyn 
erlägges, överstiger det belopp, som skulle hava avtalats 
mellan utbetalaren och mottagaren om dylika förbindelser icke 
förelegat, skola bestämmelserna i denna artikel gälla allenast 
för sistnämnda belopp. I dylikt fall skall överskjutande 
ersättningsbelopp beskattas i enlighet med lagstiftningen i de 
båda avtalsslutande staterna med iakttagande av övriga 
bestämmelser i detta avtal.

Artikel X

§ 1. Inkomst av fastighet må beskattas i den avtalsslutande 
stat i vilken fastigheten är belägen.

§ 2. Uttrycket "fastighet" skall hava den betydelse som 
uttrycket har enligt gällande lagar i den avtalsslutande stat, 
i vilken egendomen i fråga är belägen. Under detta uttryck in-
begripes dock städse egendom som utgör tillbehör till 
fastighet, levande och döda inventarier i lantbruk och skogs-
bruk, rättigheter å vilka föreskrifterna i allmän lag angående 
fastigheter äga tillämpning, nyttjanderätt till fastighet och 
rätt till föränderliga eller fasta ersättningar för nyttjandet 
av gruvor och andra naturtillgångar. Fartyg och luftfartyg 
skola däremot icke betraktas såsom fastigheter.

§ 3. Bestämmelserna i §§ 1 och 2 ovan skola äga tillämpning 
såväl å inkomst, vilken förvärvas genom omedelbart brukande av 
fastighet, som å inkomst, vilken erhålles genom uthyrning av 
fastighet eller genom annan användning av fastigheten, 
därunder inbegripet inkomst av lantbruks- och skogsföretag. 
Bestämmelserna skola likaledes tillämpas å inkomst genom 
avyttring av fastighet.

§ 4. Bestämmelserna i §§ 1-3 ovan skola även äga tillämpning å 
sådan inkomst av fastighet som förvärvas av annat företag än 
lantbruks- eller skogsföretag ävensom inkomst av fastighet som 
användes vid utövandet av fria yrken.

Artikel XI

En person med hemvist i en av de avtalsslutande staterna skall 
vara befriad från skatt i den andra avtalsslutande staten å 
vinst på grund av försäljning, överlåtelse eller byte av 
förmögenhetstillgångar som ej utgöras av fastighet, såvida 
icke personen i fråga innehar ett fast driftställe i denna 
andra stat och vinsten äger direkt samband med den från 
driftstället bedrivna rörelsen.

Artikel XII

Inkomst, som förvärvas av en person med hemvist i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna genom utövande av fritt yrke eller 
annan därmed jämförbar självständig verksamhet, skall 
beskattas allenast i denna stat om han icke har en 
stadigvarande anordning i den andra avtalsslutande staten, som 
regelmässigt står till hans förfogande för utövandet av verk-
samheten. Därest han har en sådan stadigvarande anordning, må 
den del av inkomsten som är hänförlig till denna anordning 
beskattas i den andra avtalsslutande staten.

Artikel XIII

§ 1. Där icke artiklarna XIV, XV och XVI annat föranleda skola 
löner och liknande ersättningar, som en person med hemvist i 
en av de avtalsslutande staterna uppbär på grund av 
arbetsanställning, beskattas allenast i denna stat, såvida 
icke arbetet utföres i den andra avtalsslutande staten. Om 
arbetet utföres i den andra staten, må ersättningen på grund 
av anställningen beskattas i denna stat.

§ 2. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i § 1 ovan skall 
ersättning, som en person med hemvist i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna uppbär på grund av arbete som utföres 
i den andra avtalsslutande staten, beskattas allenast i den 
förstnämnda staten, under förutsättning att

a) inkomsttagaren vistas i denna andra stat under en tidrymd 
eller tidrymder, som sammanlagt icke överstiga 183 dagar under 
beskattningsåret i fråga,

b) ersättningen betalas av eller på uppdrag av en 
arbetsgivare, som ej äger hemvist i denna andra stat, och

c) ersättningen ej såsom omkostnad belastar ett fast 
driftställe eller en stadigvarande anordning, som 
arbetsgivaren har i denna andra stat.

§ 3. Utan hinder av vad som stadgas ovan i denna artikel må 
ersättning för personligt arbete, som fullgöres

a) ombord å fartyg i internationell trafik, vilket är 
registrerat i en av de avtalsslutande staterna, beskattas i 
denna avtalsslutande stat, såvida icke företaget äger hemvist 
i den andra staten; i dylikt fall må inkomsten beskattas i den 
sistnämnda staten; samt

b) ombord å luftfartyg i internationell trafik, beskattas i 
den avtalsslutande stat, i vilken företaget har sin verkliga 
ledning.

Artikel XIV

§ 1. Ersättningar, pensioner däri inbegripna, vilka utbetalas 
av - eller från fonder inrättade av - en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna, dess politiska underavdelningar eller lokala 
myndigheter till en fysisk person såsom ersättning för arbete, 
som utförts i tjänst hos samma stat, underavdelning eller 
lokala myndighet, må beskattas i den staten. Motsvarande skall 
gälla i fråga om andra pensioner, som utbetalas av staten, 
ävensom pensioner som utbetalas av socialförsäkringsanstalter 
och liknande inrättningar.

§ 2. Bestämmelserna i artiklarna XIII, XV och XVI äro tillämp-
liga å ersättningar och pensioner som utbetalas för tjänster, 
utförda i samband med rörelse som bedrivits av en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna, dess politiska underavdelningar eller 
lokala myndigheter.

Artikel XV

Styrelsearvoden eller liknande ersättningar, som uppbäras av 
en person med hemvist i en av de avtalsslutande staterna i 
egenskap av styrelseledamot i ett bolag med hemvist i den 
andra avtalsslutande staten, må beskattas i denna andra stat.

Artikel XVI

Där icke bestämmelserna i § 1 av artikel XIV annat föranleda, 
skola pensioner och liknande ersättningar, som utbetalas i 
anledning av tidigare anställning, beskattas allenast i den 
avtalsslutande stat i vilken den som uppbär ersättningen äger 
hemvist.

Artikel XVII

Utan hinder av vad eljest i detta avtal stadgas må inkomst, 
som skådespelare, filmskådespelare, radio- eller 
televisionsartister, musiker och dylika ävensom idrottsmän 
förvärva under sin yrkesutövning, beskattas i den avtals-
slutande stat, i vilken yrket utövas.

Artikel XVIII

§ 1. Livräntor, uppburna från inkomstkällor i Sverige av en 
fysisk person med hemvist i Grekland, skola vara undantagna 
från svensk skatt.

§ 2. Livräntor, uppburna från inkomstkällor i Grekland av en 
fysisk person med hemvist i Sverige, skola vara undantagna 
från grekisk skatt.

§ 3. Med "livränta" förstås ett fastställt belopp, som på 
grund av förpliktelse skall utbetalas periodiskt på 
fastställda tider under vederbörandes livstid eller under 
annan angiven eller fastställbar tidsperiod.

Artikel XIX

En professor eller lärare vid en institution för högre 
utbildning eller vetenskaplig forskning i en av de 
avtalsslutande staterna, som uppbär ersättning för 
undervisning eller för vetenskapliga studier eller forskning 
vid universitet, högskola eller annan institution för högre 
utbildning eller för forskning i den andra avtalsslutande 
staten under tillfällig vistelse därstädes, ej överstigande 
två år, skall vara befriad från beskattning i sistnämnda stat 
för ersättningen därest ifrågavarande institution tillhör 
staten eller ock privaträttslig eller offentligrättslig 
juridisk person, vars verksamhet icke bedrives i vinstsyfte.

Artikel XX

§ 1. En studerande eller affärs- eller hantverkspraktikant 
från en av de avtalsslutande staterna, som vistas i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten allenast för sin undervisning eller 
utbildning, skall ej beskattas i denna andra stat för belopp, 
som han uppbär till bestridande av sitt uppehälle, sin 
undervisning eller sin utbildning, därest beloppen i fråga 
utbetalas till honom från utlandet.

§ 2. En fysisk person från en av de avtalsslutande staterna, 
som vistas i den andra avtalsslutande staten allenast såsom 
studerande vid universitet, högskola eller skola i den staten 
eller såsom affärs- eller hantverkspraktikant, skall under en 
period icke överstigande tre på varandra följande 
beskattningsår vara befriad från beskattning i denna andra 
stat för inkomst av anställning därstädes, under förutsättning 
att

a) inkomsten är erforderlig för att bestrida kostnaderna för 
hans uppehälle och undervisning, och

b) inkomsten i fråga icke överstiger 4 000 svenska kronor 
under beskattningsåret respektive motsvarande belopp i grekisk 
valuta.

Artikel XXI

Inkomst, beträffande vilken ingen uttrycklig bestämmelse 
meddelats i föregående artiklar av avtalet, skall beskattas 
allenast i den avtalsslutande stat i vilken den som uppbär 
inkomsten äger hemvist.

Artikel XXII

Om skatt å förmögenhet utgår i en av de avtalsslutande 
staterna eller i båda staterna, skola följande bestämmelser 
äga tillämpning:

a) Förmögenhet bestående av sådan fastighet som avses i § 2 av 
artikel X må beskattas i den avtalsslutande stat, i vilken 
fastigheten är belägen.

b) Med förbehåll för vad som stadgas i punkt a) ovan skall 
gälla att förmögenhet, bestående av tillgångar som äro att 
hänföra till anläggnings- eller driftkapital i ett företags 
fasta driftställe, eller av tillgångar, som ingå i en stadig-
varande anordning för utövandet av fritt yrke, må beskattas i 
den avtalsslutande stat i vilken det fasta driftstället eller 
den stadigvarande anordningen är belägen.

c) Alla andra slag av förmögenhet, som innehavas av en person 
med hemvist i en av de avtalsslutande staterna, skola 
beskattas allenast i denna stat.

Artikel XXIII

§ 1. I enlighet med vad som stadgas i grekisk lag angående 
kvittning mot grekisk skatt av skatt, som skall betalas i 
annat land, skall svensk skatt, som enligt svensk lag och i 
överensstämmelse med detta avtal direkt eller genom skatte-
avdrag erlägges för inkomst från inkomstkällor i Sverige, 
kvittningsvis avräknas å varje grekisk skatt, som belöper å 
samma inkomst.

§ 2. Inkomst från inkomstkällor i Grekland, vilken inkomst i 
överensstämmelse med detta avtal må beskattas i Grekland 
antingen direkt eller genom skatteavdrag, skall vara 
undantagen från svensk skatt.

Från denna regel skola dock följande undantag gälla:

a) I sådana fall då inkomsten utgöres av

1) utdelning från ett bolag med hemvist i Grekland till en 
person med hemvist i Sverige och denne icke är ett sådant 
bolag, som i enlighet med vad som stadgas i § 3 av artikel VII 
är frikallat från svensk skatt, eller

2) ränta, å vilken § 2 av artikel VIII äger tillämpning och 
vilken utbetalas till en person med hemvist i Sverige, eller

3) royalty, å vilken § 2 av artikel IX äger tillämpning och 
vilken utbetalas till en person med hemvist i Sverige,

skall svensk skatt beräknas på inkomstens bruttobelopp. Från 
den i enlighet härmed påförda svenska skatten skall avräknas 
den grekiska inkomstskatt, som belöper å samma inkomst.

b) Vid tillämpningen av den under punkt a) ovan angivna 
undantagsbestämmelsen skall, då hel befrielse från eller 
nedsättning av den till utdelningen respektive räntan eller 
royaltyn hänförliga grekiska inkomstskatten meddelats för en 
bestämd tidsperiod, från den å ifrågavarande belopp påförda 
svenska skatten avräknas ett belopp motsvarande den grekiska 
inkomstskatt som skulle hava varit hänförlig till utdelningen, 
räntan eller royaltyn, därest sådan skattebefrielse eller 
skattenedsättning ej meddelats.

c) sådana fall, då ränta uppbäres från inkomstkällor i 
Grekland av en person med hemvist i Sverige, skall - oberoende 
av bestämmelserna i punkterna a) och b) ovan - med avseende å 
de första tio beskattningsår, för vilka detta avtal äger 
tillämpning, från den å räntan belöpande svenska skatten av-
räknas ett belopp motsvarande tio procent av räntans belopp.

§ 3. Om förmögenhet, som innehaves av en person med hemvist i 
Sverige, i enlighet med artikel XXII må beskattas i Grekland, 
skall förmögenheten i fråga vara undantagen från svensk skatt.

§ 4. Svensk progressiv skatt, som påföres personer med hemvist 
i Sverige, må beräknas efter den skattesats, som skulle hava 
varit tillämplig, om även sådan inkomst eller förmögenhet, som 
enligt föreliggande avtal är undantagen från beskattning, 
inräknats i den skattepliktiga inkomsten eller förmögenheten.

Artikel XXIV

§ 1. Om enligt föreskrifterna i detta avtal en person med 
hemvist i Grekland är befriad från eller berättigad till 
nedsättning av svensk skatt, skall motsvarande befrielse eller 
nedsättning komma ett oskift dödsbo till godo, i den mån en 
eller flera av dödsbodelägarna äga hemvist i Grekland.

§ 2. Svensk skatt, som påföres ett oskift dödsbo, skall 
kvittningsvis avräknas i enlighet med bestämmelserna i artikel 
XXIII i den mån inkomsten tillkommer en dödsbodelägare med 
hemvist i Grekland.

Artikel XXV

§ 1. Medborgare i en av de avtalsslutande staterna skola icke 
i den andra avtalsslutande staten bliva föremål för någon 
beskattning eller något därmed sammanhängande skattekrav, som 
är av annat slag eller mer tyngande än den beskattning och 
därmed sammanhängande skattekrav, som medborgarna i den senare 
staten under samma förhållanden äro eller kunna bliva under-
kastade.

§ 2. Uttrycket "medborgare" betyder:

a) Beträffande Grekland: Alla grekiska medborgare samt alla 
juridiska personer och andra sammanslutningar, som bildats 
jämlikt gällande grekisk lag.

b) Beträffande Sverige: Alla svenska medborgare samt alla 
juridiska personer och andra sammanslutningar, som bildats 
jämlikt gällande svensk lag.

§ 3. Beskattningen av ett fast driftställe, som ett företag i 
en av de avtalsslutande staterna har i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten, skall i denna andra stat icke vara 
mindre fördelaktig än beskattningen av ett företag i den andra 
staten, som bedriver samma verksamhet.

Vad nu sagts skall icke anses medföra förpliktelse för någon 
av de avtalsslutande staterna att medgiva personer med hemvist 
i den andra avtalsslutande staten personliga avdrag vid 
beskattningen, skattebefrielser och skattenedsättningar på 
grund av civilstånd eller försörjningsplikt mot familj, som 
medgivas personer med hemvist i den förstnämnda staten.

§ 4. Företag i den ena avtalsslutande staten, vilkas kapital 
helt eller delvis äges eller kontrolleras, direkt eller 
indirekt, av en eller flera personer med hemvist i den andra 
avtalsslutande staten, skola icke i den förstnämnda staten 
bliva föremål för någon beskattning eller något därmed 
sammanhängande skattekrav, som är av annat slag eller mer 
tyngande än den beskattning och därmed sammanhängande skatte-
krav, som andra liknande företag i denna förstnämnda stat äro 
eller kunna bliva underkastade.

§ 5. I denna artikel avser uttrycket "beskattning" skatter av 
varje slag och beskaffenhet.

Artikel XXVI

Bestämmelserna i detta avtal påverka icke rätten att åtnjuta 
längre gående befrielser, vilka enligt folkrättens allmänna 
regler eller särskilda överenskommelser tillkomma diplomatiska 
eller konsulära befattningshavare. I den mån på grund av 
sådana längre gående befrielser inkomst och förmögenhet icke 
beskattas i den stat i vilken befattningshavaren är 
ackrediterad, förbehålles beskattningsrätten den utsändande 
staten.

Artikel XXVII

De behöriga myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna må 
utbyta sådana upplysningar (av beskaffenhet att enligt de båda 
staternas respektive skattelagar stå till beskattnings-
myndigheternas förfogande under deras sedvanliga tjänsteut-
övning) som äro nödvändiga för att tillämpa bestämmelserna i 
föreliggande avtal eller för att förebygga bedrägeri eller för 
att tillämpa givna föreskrifter till förebyggande av 
skatteflykt i fråga om de skatter, som avses i avtalet. De 
utbytta upplysningarna skola behandlas såsom hemliga och få 
icke yppas för andra personer, befattningshavare vid domstolar 
inbegripna, än dem, som handlägga taxering och uppbörd av de 
skatter, som avses i avtalet, eller avgöra besvär i anslutning 
därtill. Sådana upplysningar få emellertid icke utbytas, som 
skulle röja affärshemlighet, hemlig tillverkningsmetod, 
yrkeshemlighet eller något i affärsverksamhet nyttjat 
förfaringssätt.

Upplysningar som nu sagts må utbytas utan särskild begäran 
eller, i särskilda fall, efter därom gjord framställning. De 
behöriga myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna skola 
överlägga med varandra i syfte att fastställa de upplysningar, 
som skola utbytas utan särskild begäran.

Artikel XXVIII

§ 1. Kan skattskyldig visa att beskattningsmyndigheterna i de 
avtalsslutande staterna vidtagit åtgärder, som medfört eller 
komma att medföra en mot bestämmelserna i detta avtal 
stridande beskattning, äger han göra framställning i saken hos 
den behöriga myndigheten i den stat i vilken han äger hemvist. 
Sådan framställning skall göras innan besvär över 
beskattningen i fråga anförts hos grekisk skattedomstol. 
Befinnes framställningen grundad, skall den behöriga myndighet 
hos vilken framställningen sålunda gjorts vidtaga åtgärder för 
att träffa överenskommelse med den behöriga myndigheten i den 
andra avtalsslutande staten i syfte att undvika dylik 
beskattning.

§ 2. Skulle svårigheter eller tvivelsmål uppkomma rörande 
tolkningen eller tillämpningen av detta avtal, skola de 
behöriga myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna avgöra 
frågan genom ömsesidig överenskommelse.

Artikel XXIX

Nedan angivna avtal mellan Grekland och Sverige skola icke 
tillämpas under tid, då föreliggande avtal är gällande, 
nämligen

a) avtalet den 19 november 1931 om ömsesidigt fritagande från 
inkomstskatt i vissa fall av inkomster härrörande från rederi-
rörelse;

b) avtalet den 27 maj 1954 om ömsesidigt fritagande från be-
skattning av inkomster härrörande från luftfartstrafik.

Artikel XXX

§ 1. Detta avtal skall ratificeras av de avtalsslutande 
staterna i enlighet med vardera statens grundlagar och övriga 
föreskrifter.

§ 2. Ratifikationshandlingarna skola utväxlas i Stockholm 
snarast möjligt. 

§ 3. Sedan ratifikationshandlingarna utväxlats skall avtalet 
äga tillämpning beträffande inkomst som förvärvats å eller 
efter den 1 januari det kalenderår, under vilket utväxling av 
ratifikationshandlingarna ägt rum, samt, såvitt avser den 
svenska statliga förmögenhetsskatten, i fråga om skatt som 
utgår på grund av taxering under eller efter kalenderåret 
närmast efter det, under vilket utväxling av ratifikations-
handlingarna ägt rum.

Artikel XXXI

Detta avtal skall förbliva i kraft utan tidsbegränsning, men 
envar av de avtalsslutande staterna äger att - senast den 
30 juni under ett kalenderår, dock icke tidigare än år 1965 - 
på diplomatisk väg skriftligen uppsäga avtalet hos den andra 
avtalsslutande staten. I händelse av sådan uppsägning skall 
avtalet upphöra att gälla beträffande inkomst som förvärvas å 
eller efter den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det, 
varunder uppsägningen ägde rum, samt, såvitt avser förmögen-
hetsskatt, i fråga om skatt som utgår på grund av taxering 
under eller efter det andra kalenderåret efter det, varunder 
uppsägningen ägde rum.

Till bekräftelse härå hava undertecknade, därtill vederbör-
ligen bemyndigade, undertecknat detta avtal och försett 
detsamma med sina sigill.

Som skedde i Athén den 6 oktober 1961 i två exemplar på 
engelska språket.

För Konungariket Sverige

F. Stackelberg

För Konungariket Grekland

M. Pesmazoglou
