

1 § Det avtal för att undvika dubbelbeskattning och förhindra
skatteflykt beträffande skatter på inkomst som Sverige och
Japan undertecknade den 21 januari 1983, i den lydelse detta
har genom det protokoll om ändring i avtalet som undertecknades
den 19 februari 1999, skall gälla som lag här i landet. Avtalet
i dess genom protokollet ändrade lydelse är intaget som bilaga
till denna lag. Lag (1999:891).

2 § Avtalets beskattningsregler skall tillämpas endast i den mån de
medför inskränkning av den skattskyldighet i Sverige som annars skulle
föreligga.

3 § Har upphävts genom lag (2011:1313).

4 § Uttrycket "person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat" i
artikel 4.1 innefattar denna avtalsslutande stat, dess lokala
myndigheter och offentligrättsliga organ.

Uttrycket "fast egendom" i artikel 6.2 innefattar byggnader.

Artikel 8 tillämpas beträffande inkomst som förvärvas av
Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) genom användningen av
luftfartyg, men endast i fråga om så stor del av denna inkomst
som är hänförlig till den svenske delägaren.

Om person med hemvist i Sverige förvärvar inkomst av arbete
utfört ombord på luftfartyg som används i internationell trafik
av Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) tillämpas bestämmelserna
i artikel 15.1 och 15.2 på sådan inkomst. Lag (1999:891).

Övergångsbestämmelser

1999:891

1. Denna lag träder i kraft den dag regeringen bestämmer.

2. Denna lag skall tillämpas

a) när det gäller källskatter: på belopp som betalas eller
krediteras den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det år då
lagen träder i kraft eller senare,

b) när det gäller annan skatt på inkomst: på beskattningsår som
börjar den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det år då lagen
träder i kraft eller senare.

3. Genom lagen upphävs förordningen (1983:769) om
dubbelbeskattningsavtal mellan Sverige och Japan.

Den upphävda förordningen skall dock fortfarande tillämpas

a) när det gäller källskatter: på belopp som betalas eller
krediteras före den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det år
då lagen träder i kraft,

b) när det gäller annan skatt på inkomst: på beskattningsår som
börjar före den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det år då
lagen träder i kraft.

Bilaga

Convention
between Sweden and Japan for
the Avoidance of Double
Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion with Respect to
Taxes on Income

The Government of Sweden and the Government of Japan,

Desiring to conclude a new Convention for the avoidance of
double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with
respect to taxes on income,

Have agreed as follows:a

Article 1

Personal scopeb

This Convention shall apply to persons who are residents of one
or both of the Contracting States.

Article 2

Taxes covered

1. The taxes which are the subject of this Convention are:

(a) In Japan:

(i)     the income tax;

(ii)    the corporation tax; and

(iii)   the local inhabitant taxes

(hereinafter referred to as "Japanese tax");

(b)c In Sweden:

(i)     the national income tax, including the withholding
tax on dividends;

(ii)    the income tax on non-residents;

(iii)   the income tax on non-resident artistes and
athletes;

(iv)    the municipal income tax; and

(v)     the tax on means intended for expansion purposes;

(hereinafter referred to as "Swedish tax").

2. This Convention shall also apply to any identical or
substantially similar taxes, whether national or local, which
are imposed after the date of signature of this Convention in
addition to, or in place of, those referred to in paragraph 1.
The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall
notify each other of any substantial changes which have been
made in their respective taxation laws within a reasonable
period of time after such changes.

Article 3

General definitions

1. For the purposes of this Convention, unless the context
otherwise requires:

(a) the term "Japan", when used in a geographical sense, means
all the territory of Japan, including its territorial sea, in
which the laws relating to Japanese tax are in force, and all
the area beyond its territorial sea, including the seabed and
subsoil thereof, over which Japan has jurisdiction in
accordance with international law and in which the laws
relating to Japanese tax are in force;

(b) the term "Sweden" means the Kingdom of Sweden and includes
any area outside the territorial sea of Sweden within which in
accordance with international law and the laws of Sweden the
rights of Sweden with respect to the exploration and
exploitation of the natural resources on the seabed or in its
subsoil may be exercised;

(c) the terms "a Contracting State" and "the other Contracting
State" mean Japan or Sweden, as the context requires;

(d) the term "tax" means Japanese tax or Swedish tax, as the
context requires;

(e) the term "person" includes an individual, a company and any
other body of persons;

(f) the term "company" means any body corporate or any entity
which is treated as a body corporate for tax purposes;

(g) the terms "enterprise of a Contracting State" and
"enterprise of the other Contracting State" mean respectively
an enterprise carried on by a resident of a Contracting State
and an enterprise carried on by a resident of the other
Contracting State;

(h) the term "nationals" means all individuals possessing the
nationality of either Con-tracting State and all juridical
persons created or organized under the laws of either
Contracting State and all organizations without juridical
personality treated for the purposes of tax of either
Contracting State as juridical persons created or organized
under the laws of that Contracting State;

(i) the term "international traffic" means any transport by a
ship or aircraft operated by an enterprise of a Contracting
State, except when the ship or aircraft is operated solely
between places in the other Contracting State; and

(j) the term "competent authority" means:

(i)     in Japan, the Minister of Finance or his authorized
representative;

(ii)    in Sweden, the Minister of the Budget or his
authorized representative.

 2. As regards the application of this Convention by a
Contracting State, any term not defined therein shall, unless
the context otherwise requires, have the meaning which it has
under the laws of that Contracting State concerning the taxes
to which this Convention applies.

Article 4

Resident

1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term "resident of a
Contracting State" means any person who, under the laws of that
Contracting State, is liable to tax therein by reason of his
domicile, residence, place of head or main office or any other
criterion of a similar nature. But this term does not include
any person who is liable to tax in that Contracting State in
respect only of income from sources therein.

2. Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 an
individual is a resident of both Contracting States, then the
competent authorities of the Contracting States shall determine
by mutual agreement the Contracting State of which that
individual shall be deemed to be a resident for the purposes of
this Convention.

3. Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 a person
other than an individual is a resident of both Contracting
States, then it shall be deemed to be a resident of the
Contracting State in which its head or main office is situated.

Article 5

Permanent establishment

 1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term "permanent
establishment" means a fixed place of business through which
the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.

2. The term "permanent establishment" includes especially:

(a) a place of management;

(b) a branch;

(c) an office;

(d) a factory;

(e) a workshop; and

(f) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of
extraction of natural resources.

3. A building site or construction or installation project
constitutes a permanent establishment only if it lasts more
than twelve months.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs
of this Article, the term "permanent establishment" shall be
deemed not to include:

(a) the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage,
display or delivery of goods or merchandise belonging to the
enterprise;

(b) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise
belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of storage,
display or delivery;

(c) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise
belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of
processing by another enterprise;

(d) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the
purpose of purchasing goods or merchandise or of collecting
information, for the enterprise;

(e) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the
purpose of carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity
of a preparatory or auxiliary character; and

(f) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for any
combination of activities mentioned in sub-paragraphs (a) to
(e), provided that the overall activity of the fixed place of
business resulting from this combination is of a preparatory or
auxiliary character.

5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, where
a person - other than an agent of an independent status to whom
the provisions of paragraph 6 apply - is acting on behalf of an
enterprise and has, and habitually exercises, in a Contracting
State an authority to conclude contracts in the name of the
enterprise, that enterprise shall be deemed to have a permanent
establishment in that Contracting State in respect of any
activities which that person undertakes for the enterprise,
unless the activities of such person are limited to those
mentioned in paragraph 4 which, if exer-cised through a fixed
place of business, would not make this fixed place of business
a permanent establishment under the provisions of that
paragraph.

6. An enterprise shall not be deemed to have a permanent
establishment in a Contracting State merely because it carries
on business in that Contracting State through a broker, general
commission agent or any other agent of an independent status,
provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course of
their business.

7. The fact that a company which is a resident of a
Contracting State controls or is con-trolled by a company which
is a resident of the other Contracting State, or which carries
on business in that other Contracting State (whether through a
permanent establishment or otherwise), shall not of itself
constitute either company a permanent establishment of the
other.

Article 6

Income from immovable property

1. Income derived by a resident of a Contracting State from
immovable property situated in the other Contracting State may
be taxed in that other Contracting State.

2. The term "immovable property" shall have the meaning which
it has under the laws of the Contracting State in which the
property in question is situated. The term shall in any case
include property accessory to immovable property, livestock and
equipment used in agriculture and forestry, rights to which the
provisions of general law respecting immovable property apply,
usufruct of immovable property and rights to variable or fixed
payments as consideration for the working of, or the right to
work, mineral deposits, sources and other natural resources;
ships and aircraft shall not be regarded as immovable property.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to income derived
from the direct use, letting, or use in any other form of
immovable property.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 3 shall also apply to the
income from immovable property of an enterprise and to income
from immovable property used for the performance of independent
personal services.

Article 7

Business profits

1. The profits of an enterprise of a Contracting State shall be
taxable only in that Contracting State unless the enterprise
carries on business in the other Contracting State through a
permanent establishment situated therein. If the enterprise
carries on business as aforesaid, the profits of the enterprise
may be taxed in that other Contracting State but only so much
of them as is attributable to that permanent establishment.

2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, where an
enterprise of a Contracting State carries on business in the
other Contracting State through a permanent establishment
situated therein, there shall in each Contracting State be
attributed to that permanent establishment the profits which it
might be expected to make if it were a distinct and separate
enterprise engaged in the same or similar activities under the
same or similar conditions and dealing wholly independently
with the enterprise of which it is a permanent establishment.

3. In determining the profits of a permanent establishment,
there shall be allowed as deductions expenses which are
incurred for the purposes of the permanent establishment,
including executive and general administrative expenses so
incurred, whether in the Contracting State in which the
permanent establishment is situated or elsewhere.

4. Insofar as it has been customary in a Contracting State to
determine the profits to be attributed to a permanent
establishment on the basis of an apportionment of the total
profits of the enterprise to its various parts, nothing in
paragraph 2 shall preclude that Contracting State from
determining the profits to be taxed by such an apportionment as
may be customary; the method of apportionment adopted shall,
however, be such that the result shall be in accordance with
the principles contained in this Article.

5. No profits shall be attributed to a permanent establishment
by reason of the mere purchase by that permanent establishment
of goods or merchandise for the enterprise.

6. For the purposes of the provisions of the preceding
paragraphs of this Article, the profits to be attributed to the
permanent establishment shall be determined by the same method
year by year unless there is good and sufficient reason to the
contrary.

7. Where profits include items of income which are dealt with
separately in other Articles of this Convention, then the
provisions of those Articles shall not be affected by the
provisions of this Article.

Article 8

Shipping and air transport

1. Profits from the operation of ships or aircraft in
international traffic carried on by an enterprise of a
Contracting State shall be taxable only in that Contracting
State.

2. In respect of the operation of ships or aircraft in
international traffic carried on by an enterprise of a
Contracting State, that enter-prise, if an enterprise of
Sweden, shall be exempt from the enterprise tax in Japan, and
if an enterprise of Japan, shall be exempt from any tax similar
to the enterprise tax in Japan which may hereafter be imposed
in Sweden.

3. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this Article
shall also apply to profits from the participation in a pool, a
joint business or in an international operating agency.

Article 9d

Associated enterprises

1. Where

(a) an enterprise of a Contracting State participates directly
or indirectly in the management, control or capital of an
enterprise of the other Contracting State, or

(b) the same persons participate directly or indirectly in the
management, control or capital of an enterprise of a
Contracting State and an enterprise of the other Contracting
State,

and in either case conditions are made or imposed between the
two enterprises in their commercial or financial relations
which differ from those which would be made between independent
enterprises, then any profits which would, but for those
conditions, have accrued to one of the enterprises, but, by
reason of those conditions, have not so accrued, may be
included in the profits of that enterprise and taxed
accordingly.

2. Where a Contracting State includes, in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 1, in the profits of an enterprise of
that Contracting State - and taxes accordingly - profits on
which an enterprise of the other Contracting State has been
charged to tax in that other Contracting State and where the
competent authorities of the Contracting States agree, upon
consultation, that all or part of the profits so included are
profits which would have accrued to the enterprise of the
first-mentioned Contracting State if the conditions made
between the two enterprises had been those which would have
been made between independent enterprises, then that other
Contracting State shall make an appropriate adjustment to the
amount of the tax charged therein on those agreed profits. In
determining such adjustment, due regard shall be had to the
other provisions of this Convention.

Article 10

Dividends

1. Dividends paid by a company which is a resident of a
Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State
may be taxed in that other Contracting State.

2.e (a) Dividends mentioned in paragraph 1 may also be taxed in
the Contracting State of which the company paying the dividends
is a resident and according to the laws of that Contracting
State, but if the beneficial owner of the dividends is a
resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so charged
shall not exceed 15 per cent of the gross amount of the
dividends.

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph (a) of this
paragraph, such dividends may also be taxed in the Contracting
State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident
and according to the laws of that Contracting State, but if the
beneficial owner of the dividends is a resident of the other
Contracting State, the tax so charged shall not exceed 5 per
cent of the gross amount of the dividends, if such beneficial
owner is a company which owns at least 25 per cent of the
voting shares issued by the company paying the dividends during
the period of six months immediately before the end of the
accounting period for which the distribution of profits takes
place.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraphs (a) and
(b) of this paragraph, such dividends shall be taxable only in
the Contracting State of which the beneficial owner is a
resident, if such beneficial owner is a company which owns at
least 25 per cent of the voting shares issued by the company
paying the dividends during the period of six months
immediately before the end of the accounting period for which
the distribution of profits takes place, and satisfies on the
date of payment of such dividends the following conditions:

(i)     the shares issued by such beneficial owner are
regularly traded at a recognized stock exchange of the
Contracting State of which such beneficial owner is a resident;
or

(ii)    more than 50 per cent of the total shares issued by
such beneficial owner is owned by:

(aa)    the Government of that Contracting State, local
authorities thereof or institutions wholly owned by the
Government of that Contracting State or local authorities
thereof;

(bb)    one or more individuals who are residents of that
Contracting State;

(cc)    one or more companies, being residents of that
Contracting State, the shares issued by which are regularly
traded at a recognized stock exchange of that Contracting
State, or more than 50 per cent of the total shares issued by
which is owned by one or more individuals who are residents of
that Contracting State; or

(dd)    any combination of the Government, local
authorities, institutions, individuals and companies mentioned
in sub-paragraphs (aa), (bb) and (cc).

(d) The provisions of sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) shall not
apply in the case of dividends paid by a company that is a
resident of Japan and a Special Purpose Company or a Securities
Investment Corporation in Japan, or, by a company, being
resident of Sweden, similar to a Special Purpose Company or a
Securities Investment Corporation in Japan which may hereafter
be introduced in Sweden.

(e) The provisions of this paragraph shall not affect the
taxation of the company in respect of the profits out of which
the dividends are paid.

3.e Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, dividends
paid by a company being a resident of Japan to a company which
is a resident of Sweden shall be exempt from Swedish tax to the
extent that the dividends would have been exempt under the laws
of Sweden if both companies had been Swedish companies. This
exemption shall not apply unless the profits out of which the
dividends are paid have been subjected to the normal
corporation tax in Japan or an income tax comparable thereto.

4. The term "dividends" as used in this Article means income
from shares or other rights, not being debt-claims,
participating in profits, as well as income from other
corporate rights which is subjected to the same taxation
treatment as income from shares by the taxation laws of the
Contracting State of which the company making the distribution
is a resident.

5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the
beneficial owner of the dividends, being a resident of a
Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting
State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident,
through a permanent establishment situated therein, or performs
in that other Contracting State independent personal services
from a fixed base situated therein, and the holding in respect
of which the dividends are paid is effectively connected with
such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case, the
provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be,
shall apply.

6. Where a company which is a resident of a Contracting State
derives profits or income from the other Contracting State,
that other Contracting State may not impose any tax on the
dividends paid by the company, except insofar as such dividends
are paid to a resident of that other Contracting State or
insofar as the holding in respect of which the dividends are
paid is effectively connected with a permanent establishment or
a fixed base situated in that other Contracting State, nor
subject the company's undistributed profits to a tax on the
company's undistributed profits, even if the dividends paid or
the undistributed profits consist wholly or partly of profits
or income arising in that other Contracting State.

Article 11

Interest

1. Interest arising in a Contracting State and paid to a
resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that
other Contracting State.

2.f However, such interest may also be taxed in the Contracting
State in which it arises, and according to the laws of that
Contracting State, but if the beneficial owner of the interest
is a resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so
charged shall not exceed 10 per cent of the gross amount of the
interest.

3. The term "interest" as used in this Article means income
from debt-claims of every kind, whether or not secured by
mortgage and whether or not carrying a right to participate in
the debtor's profits, and in particular, income from Government
securities and income from bonds or debentures, including
premiums and prizes attaching to such securities, bonds or
debentures.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the
beneficial owner of the interest, being a resident of a
Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting
State in which the interest arises, through a permanent
establishment situated therein, or performs in that other
Contracting State independent personal services from a fixed
base situated therein, and the debt-claim in respect of which
the interest is paid is effectively connected with such
permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case, the
provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be,
shall apply.

5. Interest shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting State
when the payer is that Contracting State itself, a local
authority or a resi-dent of that Contracting State. Where,
however, the person paying the interest, whether he is a
resident of a Contracting State or not, has in a Contracting
State a permanent establishment or a fixed base in connection
with which the indebtedness on which the interest is paid was
incurred, and such interest is borne by such permanent
establishment or fixed base, then such interest shall be deemed
to arise in the Contracting State in which the permanent
establishment or fixed base is situated.

6. Where, by reason of a special relationship between the
payer and the beneficial owner or between both of them and some
other person, the amount of the interest, having regard to the
debt-claim for which it is paid, exceeds the amount which would
have been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in
the absence of such relationship, the provisions of this
Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such
case, the excess part of the payments shall remain taxable
according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard
being had to the other provisions of this Convention.

Article 12

Royalties

1. Royalties arising in a Contracting State and paid to a
resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that
other Contracting State.

2.g However, such royalties may also be taxed in the
Contracting State in which they arise, and according to the
laws of that Contracting State, but if the beneficial owner of
the royalties is a resident of the other Contracting State, the
tax so charged shall not exceed 10 per cent of the gross amount
of the royalties.

3. The term "royalties" as used in this Article means payments
of any kind received as a consideration for the use of, or the
right to use, any copyright of literary, artistic or scientific
work including cinematograph films and films or tapes for radio
or television broadcasting, any patent, trade mark, design or
model, plan, secret formula or process, or for the use of, or
the right to use, industrial, commercial or scientific
equipment, or for information concerning industrial, commercial
or scientific experience, as well as receipts from a bare boat
charter of ships or aircraft.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the
beneficial owner of the royalties, being a resident of a
Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting
State in which the royalties arise, through a permanent
establishment situated therein, or performs in that other
Contracting State independent personal services from a fixed
base situated therein, and the right or property in respect of
which the royalties are paid is effectively connected with such
permanent establish-ment or fixed base. In such case, the
provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be,
shall apply.

5. Royalties shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting State
when the payer is that Contracting State itself, a local
authority or a resident of that Contracting State. Where,
however, the person paying the royalties, whether he is a
resident of a Contracting State or not, has in a Contracting
State a permanent establishment or a fixed base in connection
with which the liability to pay the royalties was incurred, and
such royalties are borne by such permanent establishment or
fixed base, then such royalties shall be deemed to arise in the
Contracting State in which the permanent establishment or fixed
base is situated.

6. Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer
and the beneficial owner or between both of them and some other
person, the amount of the royalties, having regard to the use,
right or information for which they are paid, exceeds the
amount which would have been agreed upon by the payer and the
beneficial owner in the absence of such relationship, the
provisions of this Article shall apply only to the last-
mentioned amount. In such case, the excess part of the payments
shall remain taxable according to the laws of each Contracting
State, due regard being had to the other provisions of this
Convention.

Article 13

Capital gains

1. Gains derived by a resident of a Contracting State from the
alienation of immovable property referred to in Article 6 and
situated in the other Contracting State may be taxed in that
other Contracting State.

2. Gains from the alienation of any property, other than
immovable property, forming part of the business property of a
permanent establishment which an enterprise of a Contracting
State has in the other Contracting State or of any property,
other than immovable property, pertaining to a fixed base
available to a resident of a Contracting State in the other
Contracting State for the purpose of performing independent
personal services, including such gains from the alienation of
such a permanent establishment (alone or together with the
whole enterprise) or of such a fixed base, may be taxed in that
other Contracting State.

3. Gains derived by a resident of a Contracting State from the
alienation of ships or aircraft operated in international
traffic and any property, other than immovable property,
pertaining to the operation of such ships or aircraft shall be
taxable only in that Contracting State.

Article 14

Independent personal services

1. Income derived by a resident of a Con-tracting State in
respect of professional services or other activities of an
independent character shall be taxable only in that Contracting
State unless he has a fixed base regularly available to him in
the other Contracting State for the purpose of performing his
activities. If he has such a fixed base, the income may be
taxed in that other Contracting State but only so much of it as
is attributable to that fixed base.

2. The term "professional services" includes especially
independent scientific, literary, artistic, educational or
teaching activities as well as the independent activities of
physicians, lawyers, engineers, architects, dentists and
accountants.

Article 15

Dependent personal services

1. Subject to the provisions of Articles 16 and 18, salaries,
wages and other similar remuneration, other than a pension,
derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an
employment shall be taxable only in that Contracting State
unless the employment is exercised in the other Contracting
State. If the employment is so exercised, such remuneration as
is derived therefrom may be taxed in that other Contracting
State.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, remuneration
derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an
employment exercised in the other Contracting State shall be
taxable only in the first-mentioned Contracting State if:

(a) the recipient is present in that other Contracting State
for a period or periods not exceeding in the aggregate 183 days
in the calendar year concerned; and

(b) the remuneration is paid by, or on behalf of, an employer
who is not a resident of that other Contracting State; and

(c) the remuneration is not borne by a permanent establishment
or a fixed base which the employer has in that other
Contracting State.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs
of this Article, remuneration derived in respect of an
employment exercised aboard a ship or aircraft operated in
international traffic by an enterprise of a Contracting State
may be taxed in that Contracting State.

Article 16

Directors' fees

Directors' fees and other similar payments derived by a
resident of a Contracting State in his capacity as a member of
the board of directors of a company which is a resident of the
other Contracting State may be taxed in that other Contracting
State.

Article 17

Artistes and athletes

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 14 and 15, income
derived by a resident of a Contracting State as an entertainer,
such as a theatre, motion picture, radio or television artiste,
and a musician, or as an athlete, from his personal activities
as such exercised in the other Contracting State, may be taxed
in that other Contracting State.

Such income shall, however, be exempt from tax of that other
Contracting State if such activities are exercised by an
individual, being a resident of the first-mentioned Contracting
State, pursuant to a special programme for cultural exchange
agreed upon between the Governments of the two Contracting
States.

2. Where income derived in respect of personal activities
exercised by an entertainer or an athlete in his capacity as
such accrues not to the entertainer or athlete himself but to
another person, that income may, notwithstanding the provisions
of Articles 7, 14 and 15, be taxed in the Contracting State in
which the activities of the entertainer or athlete are
exercised.

Such income shall, however, be exempt from tax in that
Contracting State if such income is derived from the activities
exercised by an individual, being a resident of the other
Contracting State, pursuant to a special pro-gramme for
cultural exchange agreed upon between the Governments of the
two Contracting States and accrues to another person who is a
resident of that other Contracting State.

Article 18

Government service

1. (a) Remuneration, other than a pension, paid by a
Contracting State or a local authority thereof to an individual
in respect of services rendered to that Contracting State or
local authority thereof, in the discharge of functions of a
governmental nature, shall be taxable only in that Contracting
State.

(b) However, such remuneration shall be taxable only in the
other Contracting State if the services are rendered in that
other Con-tracting State and the individual is a resident of
that other Contracting State who:

(i)     is a national of that other Contracting State; or

(ii)    did not become a resident of that other Contracting
State solely for the purpose of performing the services.

2. (a) Any pension paid by, or out of funds to which
contributions are made by, a Con-tracting State or a local
authority thereof to an individual in respect of services
rendered to that Contracting State or local authority thereof
shall be taxable only in that Contracting State.

(b) However, such pension shall be taxable only in the other
Contracting State if the individual is a resident of, and a
national of, that other Contracting State.

3. The provisions of Articles 15, 16, 17 and 21 shall apply to
remuneration and pensions in respect of services rendered in
connection with a business carried on by a Contracting State or
a local authority thereof.

Article 19

Students

Payments which a student or business apprentice who is or was
immediately before visiting a Contracting State a resident of
the other Contracting State and who is present in the first-
mentioned Contracting State solely for the purpose of his
education or training receives for the purpose of his
maintenance, education or training shall be exempt from tax in
the first-mentioned Contracting State, provided that such
payments are made to him from outside that first-mentioned
Contracting State.

Article 20

Swedish undivided estates

1. Where under the provisions of this Convention a resident of
Japan is entitled to exemption from, or reduction of, Swedish
tax, similar exemption or reduction shall be applied to the
undivided estate of a deceased person insofar as one or more of
the beneficiaries is a resident of Japan.

2. Swedish tax on the undivided estate of a deceased person
shall, insofar as the income accrues to a beneficiary who is a
resident of Japan, be allowed as a credit against Japanese tax
payable in respect of that income, in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 22.

Article 21

Other income

1. Items of income of a resident of a Contracting State,
wherever arising, not dealt with in the foregoing Articles of
this Convention shall be taxable only in that Contracting
State.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to income,
other than income from immovable property as defined in
paragraph 2 of Article 6, if the recipient of such income,
being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in
the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment
situated therein, or performs in that other Contracting State
independent personal services from a fixed base situated
therein, and the right or property in respect of which the
income is paid is effectively connected with such permanent
establishment or fixed base. In such case, the provisions of
Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be, shall apply.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs
of this Article, items of income of a resident of a Contracting
State not dealt with in the foregoing Articles of this
Convention and arising in the other Contracting State may be
taxed in that other Contracting State.

Article 22

Elimination of double taxation

1. Subject to the laws of Japan regarding the allowance as a
credit against Japanese tax of tax payable in any country other
than Japan:

(a) Where a resident of Japan derives income from Sweden which
may be taxed in Sweden in accordance with the provisions of
this Convention, the amount of Swedish tax payable in respect
of that income shall be allowed as a credit against the
Japanese tax imposed on that resident. The amount of credit,
however, shall not exceed that part of the Japanese tax which
is appropriate to that income.

(b) Where the income derived from Sweden is a dividend paid by
a company which is a resident of Sweden to a company which is a
resident of Japan and which owns not less than 25 per cent
either of the voting shares of the company paying the dividend,
or of the total shares issued by that company, the credit shall
take into account the Swedish tax payable by the company paying
the dividend in respect of its income.

2.h (a) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (b) of this
paragraph and of paragraph 3 of Article 10, where a resident of
Sweden derives income which may be taxed in Japan in accordance
with the provisions of this Convention, Sweden shall allow as a
deduction from Swedish tax on the income of that resident an
amount equal to the tax paid in Japan. Such deduction shall
not, however, exceed that part of the Swedish tax as computed
before the deduction is given, which is appropriate to the
income which may be taxed in Japan.

(b) Where a resident of Sweden derives income which shall be
taxable only in Japan in accordance with the provisions of
Article 18, Sweden may, when determining the graduated rate of
the Swedish tax, take into account the income which shall be
taxable only in Japan.

Article 23

Non-discrimination

1. Nationals of a Contracting State shall not be subjected in
the other Contracting State to any taxation or any requirement
connected therewith which is other or more burdensome than the
taxation and connected requirements to which nationals of that
other Contracting State in the same circumstances are or may be
subjected. This provision shall, notwithstanding the provisions
of Article 1, also apply to persons who are not residents of
one or both of the Contracting States.

2. The taxation on a permanent establishment or a fixed base
which a person being a resident of a Contracting State has in
the other Contracting State shall not be less favourably levied
in that other Contracting State than the taxation levied on
persons being residents of that other Contracting State
carrying on the same activities.

This provision shall not be construed as obliging a Contracting
State to grant to residents of the other Contracting State any
per-sonal allowances, reliefs and reductions for taxation
purposes on account of civil status or family responsibilities
which it grants to its own residents.

3. Except where the provisions of Article 9, paragraph 6 of
Article 11, or paragraph 6 of Article 12, apply, interest,
royalties and other disbursements paid by an enterprise of a
Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State
shall, for the purpose of determining the taxable profits of
such enterprise, be deductible under the same conditions as if
they had been paid to a resident of the firstmentioned
Contracting State.

4. Enterprises of a Contracting State, the capital of which is
wholly or partly owned or controlled, directly or indirectly,
by one or more residents of the other Contracting State, shall
not be subjected in the first-mentioned Contracting State to
any taxation or any requirement connected therewith which is
other or more burdensome than the taxation and con-nected
requirements to which other similar enterprises of the first-
mentioned Contracting State are or may be subjected.

5. The provisions of this Article shall, notwithstanding the
provisions of Article 2, apply to taxes of every kind and
description.

Article 24

Mutual agreement procedure

1. Where a person considers that the actions of one or both of
the Contracting States result or will result for him in
taxation not in accordance with the provisions of this
Convention, he may, irrespective of the remedies provided by
the domestic laws of those Contracting States, present his case
to the competent authority of the Contracting State of which he
is a resident or, if his case comes under paragraph 1 of
Article 23, to that of the Contracting State of which he is a
national. The case must be presented within three years from
the first notification of the action resulting in taxation not
in accordance with the provisions of this Convention.

2. The competent authority shall endeavour, if the objection
appears to it to be justified and if it is not itself able to
arrive at a satisfactory solution, to resolve the case by
mutual agreement with the competent authority of the other
Contracting State, with a view to the avoidance of taxation not
in accordance with the provisions of this Convention. Any
agreement reached shall be implemented notwithstanding any time
limits in the domestic laws of the Contracting States.

3. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall
endeavour to resolve by mutual agreement any difficulties or
doubts arising as to the interpretation or application of this
Convention. They may also consult together for the elimination
of double taxation in cases not provided for in this
Convention.

4. The competent authorities of the Contracting States may
communicate with each other directly for the purpose of
reaching an agreement in the sense of the preceding paragraphs
of this Article.

Article 25

Exchange of information

1. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall
exchange such information as is necessary for carrying out the
provisions of this Convention or of the domestic laws of the
Contracting States concerning taxes covered by this Convention
insofar as the taxation thereunder is not contrary to this
Convention. The exchange of information is not restricted by
Article 1. Any information received by a Contracting State
shall be treated as secret in the same manner as information
obtained under the domestic laws of that Contracting State and
shall be disclosed only to persons or authorities, including
courts and administrative bodies, involved in the assessment or
collection of, the enforcement or prosecution in respect of, or
the determination of appeals in relation to, the taxes covered
by this Convention. Such persons or authorities shall use the
information only for such purposes. They may disclose the
information in public court proceedings or in judicial
decisions.

2. In no case shall the provisions of paragraph 1 be construed
so as to impose on a Contracting State the obligation:

(a) to carry out administrative measures at variance with the
laws and the administrative practice of that or of the other
Contracting State;

(b) to supply information which is not obtainable under the
laws or in the normal course of the administration of that or
of the other Contracting State; or

(c) to supply information which would disclose any trade,
business, industrial, commercial or professional secret or
trade process, or information, the disclosure of which would be
contrary to public policy.

Article 25

Assistance in recovery

1. Each of the Contracting States shall endeavour to collect
such taxes imposed by the other Contracting State as will
ensure that any exemption or reduced rate of tax granted under
this Convention by that other Contracting State shall not be
enjoyed by persons not entitled to such benefits. The
Contracting State making such collections shall be responsible
to the other Contracting State for the sums thus collected.

2. In no case shall the provisions of paragraph 1 be construed
so as to impose upon either of the Contracting States
endeavouring to collect the taxes the obligation to carry out
administrative measures at variance with the laws and
administrative practice of that Contracting State or which
would be contrary to the public policy (ordre public) of that
Contracting State.

Article 26

Diplomatic agents and consular officers

Nothing in this Convention shall affect the fiscal privileges
of diplomatic agents or consular officers under the general
rules of international law or under the provisions of special
agreements.

Article 27

Entry into force

1. This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of
ratification shall be exchanged at Tokyo as soon as possible.

2. This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
after the date of the exchange of instruments of ratification
and shall have effect:

(a) in Japan:

as regards income for any taxable year beginning on or after
the first day of January of the calendar year next following
that in which this Convention enters into force; and

(b) in Sweden:

as regards income derived on or after the first day of January
of the calendar year next following that in which this
Convention enters into force.

3. The Convention between Japan and Sweden for the Avoidance of
Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
respect to Taxes on Income signed at Tokyo on December 12,
1956, modified and supplemented by the Protocol signed at Tokyo
on April 15, 1964, shall terminate and cease to have effect in
respect of income to which this Convention applies under the
provisions of paragraph 2.

Article 28

Termination

This Convention shall continue in effect indefinitely but
either Contracting State may, on or before the thirtieth day of
June of any calendar year beginning after the expiration of a
period of five years from the date of its entry into force,
give to the other Contracting State, through the diplomatic
channel, written notice of termination and, in such event, this
Convention shall cease to have effect:

(a) in Japan:

as regards income for any taxable year beginning on or after
the first day of January of the calendar year next following
that in which the notice of termination is given; and

(b) in Sweden:

as regards income derived on or after the first day of January
of the calendar year next following that in which the notice of
termination is given.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized thereto by
their respective Governments, have signed this Convention.

DONE in Duplicate at Stockholm on 21 January 1983 in the
English language.

For the Government of Sweden:

Lennart Bodström

For the Government of Japan:

Wataru Owada


Avtal
mellan Sverige och Japan för att
undvika dubbelbeskattning och
förhindra skatteflykt
beträffande skatter på inkomst

Sveriges regering och Japans regering, som önskar ingå ett nytt
avtal för att undvika dubbelbeskattning och förhindra
skatteflykt beträffande skatter på inkomst, har kommit överens
om följande:a

Artikel 1

Personer på vilka avtalet tillämpasb

Detta avtal tillämpas på personer som har hemvist i en
avtalsslutande stat eller i båda avtalsslutande staterna.

Artikel 2

Skatter som omfattas av avtalet

1. De skatter som omfattas av detta avtal är:

a) I Japan:

1)      inkomstskatten;

2)      bolagsskatten; och

3)      de lokala skatterna på invånarna;

        (i det följande benämnd "japansk skatt");

b)c I Sverige:

1)      den statliga inkomstskatten, kupongskatten däri
        inbegripen;

2)      den särskilda inkomstskatten för utomlands bosatta;

3)      den särskilda inkomstskatten för utomlands bosatta
        artister m.fl.;

4)      den kommunala inkomstskatten; och

5)      expansionsmedelsskatten;

        (i det följande benämnd "svensk skatt").

2. Detta avtal tillämpas även på skatter av samma eller i
huvudsak likartat slag - oavsett om de är statliga eller lokala
- som efter undertecknandet av detta avtal påförs vid sidan av
eller i stället för de skatter som avses i punkt 1. De behöriga
myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna skall meddela
varandra väsentliga ändringar som gjorts i respektive
skattelagstiftning inom rimlig tid efter sådana ändringar.

Artikel 3

Allmänna definitioner

1. Om inte sammanhanget föranleder annat, har i detta avtal
följande uttryck nedan angiven betydelse:

a) "Japan" åsyftar, när det används i geografisk betydelse,
Japans territorium, vari inbegrips dess territorialvatten, inom
vilket de lagar som avser japansk skatt är i kraft, och allt
område utanför dess territorialvatten, däri inbegripet
havsbottnen och dennas underlag, över vilket Japan har domsrätt
i enlighet med folkrättens allmänna regler och inom vilket de
lagar som avser japansk skatt är i kraft;

b) "Sverige" åsyftar Konungariket Sverige och inbegriper varje
utanför Sveriges territorialvatten beläget område, inom vilket
Sverige i överensstämmelse med folkrättens allmänna regler och
enligt svensk lag äger utöva sina rättigheter med avseende på
utforskandet och utnyttjandet av naturtillgångarna i
havsbottnen eller i dennas underlag;

c) "en avtalsslutande stat" och "den andra avtalsslutande
staten" åsyftar Japan eller Sverige beroende på sammanhanget;

d) "skatt" avser japansk skatt eller svensk skatt beroende på
sammanhanget;

e) "person" inbegriper fysisk person, bolag och annan
sammanslutning;

f) "bolag" åsyftar juridisk person eller annan som vid
beskattningen behandlas såsom juridisk person;

g) "företag i en avtalsslutande stat" och "företag i den andra
avtalsslutande staten" åsyftar företag som bedrivs av person
med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat, respektive företag som
bedrivs av person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande
staten;

h) "medborgare" åsyftar fysisk person som har medborgarskap i
endera avtalsslutande staten och juridisk person som bildats
eller organiserats enligt lagstiftningen i endera
avtalsslutande staten samt sammanslutning - som inte är
juridisk person men som vid beskattningen i endera
avtalsslutande staten behandlas såsom juridisk person - vilken
bildats eller organiserats enligt lagstiftningen i denna
avtalsslutande stat;

i) "internationell trafik" åsyftar transport med skepp eller
luftfartyg som används av företag i en avtalsslutande stat utom
då skeppet eller luftfartyget används uteslutande mellan
platser i den andra avtalsslutande staten; och

j) "behörig myndighet" åsyftar:

1)      i Japan, finansministern eller dennes
        befullmäktigade ombud;

2)      i Sverige, budgetministern eller dennes
        befullmäktigade ombud.

2. Då en avtalsslutande stat tillämpar detta avtal anses,
såvida inte sammanhanget föranleder annat, varje uttryck som
inte definierats i avtalet, ha den betydelse som uttrycket har
enligt den avtalsslutande statens lagstiftning i fråga om
sådana skatter på vilka detta avtal tillämpas.

Artikel 4

Hemvist

1. Vid tillämpningen av detta avtal åsyftar uttrycket "person
med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat" person som enligt
lagstiftningen i denna avtalsslutande stat är skattskyldig där
på grund av hemvist, bosättning, plats för huvudkontor eller
annan liknande omständighet. Uttrycket inbegriper emellertid
inte person som är skattskyldig i denna avtalsslutande stat
endast för inkomst från källa där.

2. Då på grund av bestämmelserna i punkt 1 fysisk person har
hemvist i båda avtalsslutande staterna avgör de behöriga
myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna genom ömsesidig
överenskommelse i vilken avtalsslutande stat denna fysiska
person skall anses ha hemvist vid tillämpningen av detta avtal.

3. Då på grund av bestämmelserna i punkt 1 annan person än
fysisk person har hemvist i båda avtalsslutande staterna, anses
personen i fråga ha hemvist i den avtalsslutande stat där den
har sitt huvudkontor.

Artikel 5

Fast driftställe

1. Vid tillämpningen av detta avtal åsyftar uttrycket "fast
driftställe" en stadigvarande plats för affärsverksamhet, från
vilken ett före-tags verksamhet helt eller delvis bedrivs.

2. Uttrycket "fast driftställe" innefattar särskilt:

a) plats för företagsledning;

b) filial;

c) kontor;

d) fabrik;

e) verkstad; och

f) gruva, olje- eller gaskälla, stenbrott eller annan plats för
utvinning av naturtillgångar.

3. Plats för byggnads-, anläggnings- eller
installationsverksamhet utgör fast driftställe endast om
verksamheten pågår mer än tolv månader.

4. Utan hinder av föregående bestämmelser i denna artikel anses
uttrycket "fast driftställe" inte innefatta:

a) användningen av anordningar uteslutande för lagring,
utställning eller utlämnande av företaget tillhöriga varor;

b) innehavet av ett företaget tillhörigt varulager uteslutande
för lagring, utställning eller utlämnande;

c) innehavet av ett företaget tillhörigt varulager uteslutande
för bearbetning eller förädling genom annat företags försorg;

d) innehavet av stadigvarande plats för affärsverksamhet
uteslutande för inköp av varor eller inhämtande av upplysningar
för företaget;

e) innehavet av stadigvarande plats för affärsverksamhet
uteslutande för att för företaget bedriva annan verksamhet av
förberedande eller biträdande art; och

f) innehavet av stadigvarande plats för affärsverksamhet
uteslutande för att kombinera verksamheter som anges i
punkterna a)-e), under förutsättning att hela den verksamhet
som bedrivs från den stadigvarande platsen för affärsverksamhet
på grund av denna kombination är av förberedande eller
biträdande art.

5. Om person, som inte är sådan oberoende representant på
vilken bestämmelserna i punkt 6 tillämpas, är verksam för ett
företag samt i en avtalsslutande stat har och där regelmässigt
använder fullmakt att sluta avtal i företagets namn, anses
detta företag - utan hinder av bestämmelserna i punkterna 1 och
2 - ha fast driftställe i denna avtalsslutande stat i fråga om
varje verksamhet som denna person bedriver för företaget. Detta
gäller dock inte, om den verksamhet som denna person bedriver
är begränsad till sådan som anges i punkt 4 och som - om den
bedrevs från en stadigvarande plats för affärsverksamhet - inte
skulle göra denna stadigvarande plats för affärsverksam-het
till fast driftställe enligt bestämmelserna i nämnda punkt.

6. Företag anses inte ha fast driftställe i en avtalsslutande
stat endast på den grund att företaget bedriver
affärsverksamhet i denna avtalsslutande stat genom förmedling
av mäklare, kommissionär eller annan oberoende representant,
under förutsättning att sådan person därvid bedriver sin
sedvanliga affärsverk-samhet.

7. Den omständigheten att ett bolag med hemvist i en
avtalsslutande stat kontrollerar eller kontrolleras av ett
bolag med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten eller ett
bolag som bedriver affärsverksamhet i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat (antingen från fast driftställe eller på
annat sätt), medför inte i och för sig att någotdera bolaget
utgör fast driftställe för det andra.

Artikel 6

Inkomst av fast egendom

1. Inkomst, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar av fast egendom belägen i den andra avtalsslutande
staten, får beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

2. Uttrycket "fast egendom" har den betydelse som uttrycket har
enligt lagstiftningen i den avtalsslutande stat där egendomen
är belägen. Uttrycket inbegriper dock alltid tillbehör till
fast egendom, levande och döda inventarier i lantbruk och
skogsbruk, rättigheter på vilka bestämmelserna i privaträtten
om fast egendom tillämpas, nyttjanderätt till fast egendom samt
rätt till föränderliga eller fasta ersättningar för nyttjandet
av eller rätten att nyttja mineralförekomst, källa eller annan
naturtillgång. Skepp, båtar och luftfartyg anses inte vara fast
egendom.

3. Bestämmelserna i punkt 1 tillämpas på inkomst som förvärvas
genom omedelbart brukande, genom uthyrning eller annan
användning av fast egendom.

4. Bestämmelserna i punkterna 1 och 3 tillämpas även på inkomst
av fast egendom som tillhör företag och på inkomst av fast
egendom som används vid självständig yrkesutövning.

Artikel 7

Inkomst av rörelse

1. Inkomst av rörelse, som företag i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar, beskattas endast i denna avtalsslutande stat, såvida
inte företaget bedriver rörelse i den andra avtalsslutande
staten från där beläget fast driftställe. Om företaget bedriver
rörelse på nyss angivet sätt, får företagets inkomst beskattas
i den andra avtalsslutande staten, men endast så stor del av
den som är hänförlig till det fasta driftstället.

2. Om företag i en avtalsslutande stat bedriver rörelse i den
andra avtalsslutande staten från där beläget fast driftställe,
hänförs, om inte bestämmelserna i punkt 3 föranleder annat, i
vardera avtalsslutande staten till det fasta driftstället den
inkomst som det kan antas att driftstället skulle ha förvärvat
om det varit ett fristående företag, som bedrivit verksamhet av
samma eller liknande slag under samma eller liknande villkor
och självständigt avslutat affärer med det företag till vilket
driftstället hör.

3. Vid bestämmandet av fast driftställes inkomst medges avdrag
för utgifter som uppkommit för det fasta driftstället, härunder
inbegripna utgifter för företagets ledning och allmänna
förvaltning, oavsett om utgifterna uppkommit i den
avtalsslutande stat där det fasta driftstället är beläget eller
annorstädes.

4. I den mån inkomst hänförlig till fast driftställe brukat i
en avtalsslutande stat bestämmas på grundval av en fördelning
av företagets hela inkomst på de olika delarna av företaget,
hindrar bestämmelserna i punkt 2 inte att i denna
avtalsslutande stat den skattepliktiga inkomsten bestäms genom
sådant förfarande. Den fördelningsmetod som används skall dock
vara sådan att resultatet överensstämmer med principerna i
denna artikel.

5. Inkomst hänförs inte till fast driftställe endast av den
anledningen att varor inköps genom det fasta driftställets
försorg för företaget.

6. Vid tillämpningen av bestämmelserna i föregående punkter i
denna artikel bestäms inkomst som är hänförlig till det fasta
driftstället genom samma förfarande år från år, såvida inte
goda och tillräckliga skäl föranleder annat.

7. Ingår i inkomst av rörelse inkomstslag som behandlas
särskilt i andra artiklar av detta avtal, berörs bestämmelserna
i dessa artiklar inte av reglerna i förevarande artikel.

Artikel 8

Sjöfart och luftfart

1. Inkomst som företag i en avtalsslutande stat förvärvar genom
användningen av skepp eller luftfartyg i internationell trafik
beskattas endast i denna avtalsslutande stat.

2. Beträffande företag i en avtalsslutande stat som bedriver
internationell trafik genom användningen av skepp eller
luftfartyg gäller, att sådant företag, om det är ett svenskt
företag, är undantaget från företagsskatten i Japan och, om det
är ett japanskt företag, är undantaget från varje svensk skatt
liknande företags-skatten i Japan som framdeles kan komma att
tas ut i Sverige.

3. Bestämmelserna i föregående punkter i denna artikel
tillämpas även på inkomst som förvärvas genom deltagande i en
pool, ett gemensamt företag eller en internationell
driftsorganisation.

Artikel 9d

Företag med intressegemenskap

1. I fall då

a) ett företag i en avtalsslutande stat direkt eller indirekt
deltar i ledningen eller kontrollen av ett företag i den andra
avtalsslutande staten eller äger del i detta företags kapital,
eller

b) samma personer direkt eller indirekt deltar i ledningen
eller kontrollen av såväl ett företag i en avtalsslutande stat
som ett företag i den andra avtalsslutande staten eller äger
del i båda dessa företags kapital, iakttas följande.

Om mellan företagen i fråga om handelsför-bindelser eller
finansiella förbindelser avtalas eller föreskrivs villkor, som
avviker från dem som skulle ha avtalats mellan av varandra
oberoende företag, får all inkomst, som utan sådana villkor
skulle ha tillkommit det ena företaget men som på grund av
villkoren i fråga inte tillkommit detta företag, inräknas i
detta företags inkomst och beskattas i överensstämmelse därmed.

2. I fall då en avtalsslutande stat, i enlighet med
bestämmelserna i punkt 1, i inkomsten för ett företag i denna
avtalsslutande stat inräknar - och i överensstämmelse därmed
beskattar - inkomst, för vilken ett företag i den andra
avtalsslutande staten beskattats i denna andra avtalsslutande
stat och förutsatt att de behöriga myndigheterna i de
avtalsslutande staterna, efter överläggning, är överens om att
den sålunda inräknade inkomsten eller del av den är sådan som
skulle ha tillkommit företaget i den förstnämnda avtalsslutande
staten om de villkor som avtalats mellan företagen hade varit
sådana som skulle ha avtalats mellan av varandra oberoende
företag, skall denna andra avtalsslutande stat genomföra
vederbörlig justering av det skattebelopp som påförts för
inkomsten där. Vid sådan justering iakttas övriga bestämmelser
i detta avtal.

Artikel 10

Utdelning

1. Utdelning från bolag med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
till person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten får
beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

2.e a) Utdelning som anges i punkt 1 får beskattas även i den
avtalsslutande stat där det bolag som betalar utdelningen har
hemvist, enligt lagstiftningen i denna avtalsslutande stat, men
om den som har rätt till utdelningen har hemvist i den andra
avtalsslutande staten får skatten inte överstiga 15 procent av
utdelningens bruttobelopp.

b) Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i a) i denna punkt får
utdelning beskattas även i den avtalsslutande stat där det
bolag som betalar utdelningen har hemvist, enligt
lagstiftningen i denna avtalsslutande stat, men om den som har
rätt till utdelningen har hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande
staten, får skatten inte överstiga 5 procent av utdelningens
bruttobelopp, om den som har rätt till utdelningen är ett bolag
som under en period av sex månader omedelbart före utgången av
det räkenskapsår för vilket utdelningen görs innehaft minst 25
procent av röstetalet i det utdelande bolaget.

c) Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i a) och b) i denna punkt
beskattas utdelning endast i den avtalsslutande stat där den
som har rätt till utdelningen har hemvist, om den som har rätt
till utdelningen är ett bolag som under en period av sex
månader omedelbart före utgången av det räkenskapsår för vilket
utdelningen görs innehaft minst 25 procent av röstetalet i det
utdelande bolaget och som vid tidpunkten för utbetalningen av
utdelningen uppfyller följande villkor:

1)      att aktierna i det bolag som har rätt till
        utdelningen regelmässigt omsätts på en erkänd aktiebörs i den
        avtalsslutande staten där bolaget har hemvist, eller

2)      att mer än 50 procent av det totala antalet aktier i
        det bolag som har rätt till utdelningen ägs:

aa)     av denna avtalsslutande stats regering, dess lokala
        myndigheter eller institutioner helägda av denna avtalsslutande
        stats regering eller dess lokala myndigheter,

bb)     av en eller flera fysiska personer som har hemvist i
        den avtalsslutande staten,

cc)     av ett eller flera bolag som har hemvist i den
        avtalsslutande staten, vilkas aktier regelmässigt omsätts på en
        erkänd aktiebörs i den avtalsslutande staten, eller vilkas
        aktier till mer än 50 procent ägs av en eller flera fysiska
        personer som har hemvist i den avtalsslutande staten, eller

dd)     i kombination av någon som anges i aa) - cc) i denna
        punkt.

d) Bestämmelserna i b) och c) i denna punkt tillämpas inte på
utdelning som betalas av ett bolag med hemvist i Japan om ett
sådant bolag är ett "Special Purpose Company" eller ett
"Securities Investment Corporation" i Japan eller, av ett bolag
med hemvist i Sverige som framdeles kan komma att etableras i
Sverige med liknande syfte som ett "Special Purpose Company"
eller ett "Securities Investment Corporation" i Japan.

e) Bestämmelserna i denna punkt berör inte bolagets beskattning
för vinst av vilken utdelningen betalas.

3.e Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i punkt 1 är utdelning från
bolag med hemvist i Japan till bolag med hemvist i Sverige
undantagen från svensk skatt om utdelningen skulle ha varit
undantagen enligt svensk lagstiftning om båda bolagen varit
svenska bolag. Detta gäller emellertid endast om vinsten av
vilken utdelningen betalas har varit föremål för normal
bolagsskatt i Japan eller en inkomstskatt jämförlig därmed.

4. Med uttrycket "utdelning" förstås i denna artikel inkomst av
aktier eller andra rättigheter, som inte är fordringar, med
rätt till andel i vinst, samt inkomst av andra andelar i bolag,
som enligt skattelagstiftningen i den avtals-slutande stat där
det utdelande bolaget har hemvist vid beskattningen behandlas
på samma sätt som inkomst av aktier.

5. Bestämmelserna i punkterna 1 och 2 tillämpas inte, om den
som har rätt till utdelningen har hemvist i en avtalsslutande
stat och bedriver rörelse i den andra avtalsslutande staten,
där bolaget som betalar utdelningen har hemvist, från där
beläget fast driftställe eller utövar självständig
yrkesverksamhet i denna andra stat från där belägen
stadigvarande anordning, samt den andel på grund av vilken
utdelningen betalas äger verkligt samband med det fasta
driftstället eller den stadigvarande anordningen. I sådant fall
tillämpas bestämmelserna i artikel 7 respektive artikel 14.

6. Om bolag med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat förvärvar
inkomst från den andra avtalsslutande staten, får denna andra
avtalsslutande stat inte beskatta utdelning som bolaget
betalar, utom i den mån utdelningen betalas till person med
hemvist i denna andra avtalsslutande stat eller i den mån den
andel på grund av vilken utdelningen betalas äger verk-ligt
samband med fast driftställe eller stadigvarande anordning i
denna andra avtalsslutande stat, och ej heller beskatta
bolagets icke utdelade vinst, även om utdelningen eller den
icke utdelade vinsten helt eller delvis utgörs av inkomst som
uppkommit i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

Artikel 11

Ränta

1. Ränta, som härrör från en avtalsslutande stat och som
betalas till person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande
staten, får beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

2.f Räntan får emellertid beskattas även i den avtalsslutande
stat från vilken den härrör, enligt lagstiftningen i denna
avtalsslutande stat, men om den som har rätt till räntan har
hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten får skatten inte
överstiga 10 procent av räntans bruttobelopp.

3. Med uttrycket "ränta" förstås i denna artikel inkomst av
varje slags fordran, antingen den säkerställts genom inteckning
i fast egendom eller inte och antingen den medför rätt till
andel i gäldenärens vinst eller inte. Uttrycket åsyftar
särskilt inkomst av värdepapper, som utfärdats av staten, och
inkomst av obligationer eller debentures, däri inbegripna
agiobelopp och vinster som hänför sig till sådana värdepapper,
obligationer eller debentures.

4. Bestämmelserna i punkterna 1 och 2 tillämpas inte, om den
som har rätt till räntan har hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
och bedriver rörelse i den andra avtalsslutande staten, från
vilken räntan härrör, från där beläget fast driftställe eller
utövar självständig yrkesverksamhet i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat från där belägen stadigvarande anordning,
samt den fordran för vilken räntan betalas äger verkligt
samband med det fasta driftstället eller den stadigvarande
anordningen. I sådant fall tillämpas bestämmelserna i artikel 7
respektive artikel 14.

5. Ränta anses härröra från en avtalsslutande stat om
utbetalaren är den avtalsslutande staten själv, lokal myndighet
eller person med hemvist i denna avtalsslutande stat. Om emel-
lertid den person som betalar räntan, antingen han har hemvist
i en avtalsslutande stat eller inte, i en avtalsslutande stat
har fast driftställe eller stadigvarande anordning i samband
var-med den skuld uppkommit på vilken räntan betalas, och
räntan belastar det fasta driftstället eller den stadigvarande
anordningen, an-ses räntan härröra från den avtalsslutande stat
där det fasta driftstället eller den stadigvarande anordningen
finns.

6. Då på grund av särskilda förbindelser mellan utbetalaren och
den som har rätt till räntan eller mellan dem båda och annan
person räntebeloppet, med hänsyn till den fordran för vilken
räntan betalas, överstiger det belopp som skulle ha avtalats
mellan utbetalaren och den som har rätt till räntan om sådana
förbindelser inte förelegat, tillämpas bestämmelserna i denna
artikel endast på sistnämnda be-lopp. I sådant fall beskattas
överskjutande belopp enligt lagstiftningen i vardera
avtalsslutande staten med iakttagande av övriga bestämmelser i
detta avtal.

Artikel 12

Royalty

1. Royalty, som härrör från en avtalsslutande stat och som
betalas till person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande
staten, får beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

2.g Royaltyn får emellertid beskattas även i den avtalsslutande
stat från vilken den härrör, enligt lagstiftningen i denna
avtalsslutande stat, men om den som har rätt till royaltyn har
hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten får skatten inte
överstiga 10 procent av royaltyns bruttobelopp.

3. Med uttrycket "royalty" förstås i denna artikel varje slags
betalning som mottas såsom ersättning för nyttjandet av eller
för rätten att nyttja upphovsrätt till litterärt, konstnärligt
eller vetenskapligt verk, häri inbegripet bio-graffilm samt
film och band för radio- och televisionsutsändning, patent,
varumärke, mönster eller modell, ritning, hemligt recept eller
hemlig tillverkningsmetod samt för nyttjandet av eller för
rätten att nyttja industriell, kom-mersiell eller vetenskaplig
utrustning eller för upplysning om erfarenhetsrön av
industriell, kommersiell eller vetenskaplig natur liksom även
ersättning för uthyrning av skepp eller luftfartyg på "bare
boat" basis.

4. Bestämmelserna i punkterna 1 och 2 tillämpas inte om den som
har rätt till royaltyn har hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat och
bedriver rörelse i den andra avtalsslutande staten, från vilken
royaltyn härrör, från där beläget fast driftställe eller utövar
självständig yrkes-verksamhet i denna andra avtalsslutande stat
från där belägen stadigvarande anordning, samt den rättighet
eller egendom i fråga om vilken royaltyn betalas äger verkligt
samband med det fasta driftstället eller den stadigvarande
anordningen. I sådant fall tillämpas bestämmelserna i artikel 7
respektive artikel 14.

5. Royalty anses härröra från en avtalsslutande stat om
utbetalaren är den avtalsslutande staten själv, lokal myndighet
eller person med hemvist i denna avtalsslutande stat. Om
emellertid den person som betalar royaltyn, antingen han har
hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat eller inte, i en
avtalsslutande stat har fast driftställe eller stadigvarande
anordning för vars räkning rätten eller egendomen, som ger
upphov till royaltyn, förvärvats och royaltyn be-lastar det
fasta driftstället eller den stadigvarande anordningen, anses
royaltyn härröra från den avtalsslutande stat där det fasta
driftstället eller den stadigvarande anordningen finns.

6. Då på grund av särskilda förbindelser mellan utbetalaren och
den som har rätt till royaltyn eller mellan dem båda och annan
person royaltybeloppet, med hänsyn till det nyttjande, den rätt
eller den upplysning för vilken royaltyn betalas, överstiger
det belopp som skulle ha avtalats mellan utbetalaren och den
som har rätt till royaltyn om sådana förbindelser inte
förelegat, tillämpas bestämmelserna i denna artikel endast på
sistnämnda belopp. I sådant fall beskattas överskjutande belopp
en-ligt lagstiftningen i vardera avtalsslutande staten med
iakttagande av övriga bestämmelser i detta avtal.

Artikel 13

Realisationsvinst

1. Vinst, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar på grund av överlåtelse av sådan fast egendom som
avses i artikel 6 och som är belägen i den andra avtalsslutande
staten, får beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

2. Vinst på grund av överlåtelse av annan egendom än fast
egendom, som utgör del av rörelsetillgångarna i fast
driftställe, vilket ett företag i en avtalsslutande stat har i
den andra avtalsslutande staten, eller av annan egendom än fast
egendom hänförlig till stadigvarande anordning för att utöva
självständig yrkesverksamhet, som person med hemvist i en
avtalsslutande stat har i den andra avtalsslutande staten, får
beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat. Detsamma gäller
vinst på grund av överlåtelse av sådant fast driftställe (för
sig eller tillsammans med hela företaget) eller av sådan
stadigvarande anordning.

3. Vinst, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar på grund av överlåtelse av skepp eller luftfartyg som
används i internationell trafik och annan egendom än fast
egendom som är hänförlig till användningen av sådana skepp
eller luftfartyg, beskattas endast i denna avtalsslutande stat.

Artikel 14

Självständig yrkesutövning

1. Inkomst, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar genom att utöva fritt yrke eller annan självständig
verksamhet, beskattas endast i denna avtalsslutande stat om han
inte i den andra avtalsslutande staten har stadigvarande
anordning, som regelmässigt står till hans förfogande för att
utöva verk-samheten. Om han har sådan stadigvarande anordning,
får inkomsten beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat men
endast så stor del av den som är hänförlig till denna
stadigvarande anordning.

2. Uttrycket "fritt yrke" inbegriper särskilt självständig
vetenskaplig, litterär och konstnärlig verksamhet,
uppfostrings- och under-visningsverksamhet samt sådan
självständig verksamhet som läkare, advokat, ingenjör,
arkitekt, tandläkare och revisor utövar.

Artikel 15

Enskild tjänst

1. Om inte bestämmelserna i artiklarna 16 och 18 föranleder
annat, beskattas lön och annan liknande ersättning, med
undantag för pension, som person med hemvist i en avtals-
slutande stat uppbär på grund av anställning, endast i denna
avtalsslutande stat, såvida inte arbetet utförs i den andra
avtalsslutande staten. Om arbetet utförs i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat, får ersättning som uppbärs för arbetet
beskattas där.

2. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i punkt 1 beskattas
ersättning, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
uppbär för arbete som utförs i den andra avtalsslutande staten,
endast i den förstnämnda avtalsslutande staten, om:

a) mottagaren vistas i den andra avtalsslutande staten under
tidrymd eller tidrymder som sammanlagt inte överstiger 183
dagar under kalenderåret i fråga, och

b) ersättningen betalas av arbetsgivare som inte har hemvist i
den andra avtalsslutande staten eller på dennes vägnar, samt

c) ersättningen inte belastar fast driftställe eller
stadigvarande anordning som arbetsgivaren har i den andra
avtalsslutande staten.

3. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i föregående punkter i denna
artikel får ersättning för arbete, som utförs ombord på skepp
eller luftfartyg som används i internationell trafik av företag
i en avtalsslutande stat, beskattas i denna avtalsslutande
stat.

Artikel 16

Styrelsearvode

Styrelsearvode och annan liknande ersättning, som person med
hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat uppbär i egenskap av medlem i
styrelse eller annat liknande organ i bolag med hemvist i den
andra avtalsslutande staten, får beskattas i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat.

Artikel 17

Artister och idrottsmän

1. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i artiklarna 14 och 15 får
inkomst, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar genom sin personliga verksamhet i den andra
avtalsslutande staten i egenskap av artist, såsom teater- eller
filmskådespelare, radio- eller televisionsartist eller musiker,
eller av idrottsman, beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande
stat.

Sådan inkomst undantas emellertid från beskattning i denna
andra avtalsslutande stat om fysisk person med hemvist i den
förstnämnda avtalsslutande staten utövar sådan verksamhet
enligt ett särskilt program för kulturellt utbyte som
regeringarna i de båda avtalsslutande staterna har kommit
överens om.

2. I fall då inkomst genom personlig verksamhet, som artist
eller idrottsman utövar i denna egenskap, inte tillfaller
artisten eller idrottsmannen själv utan annan person, får denna
inkomst, utan hinder av bestämmelserna i artiklarna 7, 14 och
15, beskattas i den avtalsslutande stat där artisten eller
idrottsmannen utövar verksamheten.

Sådan inkomst undantas emellertid från beskattning i denna
avtalsslutande stat om inkomsten förvärvas genom verksamhet som
fysisk person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten
utövar enligt ett särskilt program för kulturellt utbyte som
regeringarna i de båda avtalsslutande staterna har kommit
överens om och inkomsten tillfaller annan person som har
hemvist i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

Artikel 18

Offentlig tjänst

1. a) Ersättning (med undantag för pension), som betalas av en
avtalsslutande stat eller dess lokala myndigheter till fysisk
person på grund av offentligt uppdrag i denna avtalsslutande
stats eller dess lokala myndigheters tjänst, beskattas endast i
denna avtalsslutande stat.

b) Sådan ersättning beskattas emellertid endast i den andra
avtalsslutande staten om arbetet utförs i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat och personen i fråga har hemvist i denna
andra avtalsslutande stat och:

1)      är medborgare i denna andra avtalsslutande stat;
        eller

2)      inte fick hemvist i denna andra avtalsslutande stat
        uteslutande för att utföra arbetet.

2. a) Pension, som betalas av, eller från fonder till vilka
bidrag lämnas av, en avtalsslutande stat eller dess lokala
myndigheter till fysisk person på grund av arbete som utförts i
denna avtalsslutande stats eller dess lokala myndigheters
tjänst, beskattas endast i denna avtalsslutande stat.

b) Sådan pension beskattas emellertid endast i den andra
avtalsslutande staten om personen i fråga har hemvist och är
medborgare i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

3. Bestämmelserna i artiklarna 15, 16, 17 och 21 tillämpas på
ersättning och pension som betalas på grund av arbete som
utförts i samband med rörelse som bedrivs av en avtalsslutande
stat eller dess lokala myndigheter.

Artikel 19

Studerande

Studerande eller affärspraktikant, som har eller omedelbart
före vistelse i en avtalsslutande stat hade hemvist i den andra
avtalsslutande staten och som vistas i den förstnämnda
avtalsslutande staten uteslutande för sin under-visning eller
utbildning, undantas från beskattning i den förstnämnda
avtalsslutande staten för belopp som han erhåller för sitt
uppehälle, sin undervisning eller utbildning, under
förutsättning att beloppen betalas till honom från källa
utanför denna förstnämnda avtalsslu-tande stat.

Artikel 20

Svenska oskiftade dödsbon

1. I fall då enligt bestämmelserna i detta avtal person med
hemvist i Japan är berättigad till befrielse från eller
nedsättning av svensk skatt, skall motsvarande befrielse eller
nedsättning medges oskiftat dödsbo i den mån en eller flera av
dödsbodelägare har hemvist i Japan.

2. Svensk skatt på oskiftat dödsbo skall, i den mån inkomsten
tillkommer dödsbodelägare med hemvist i Japan, avräknas mot
japansk skatt som utgår på denna inkomst i enlighet med
bestämmelserna i artikel 22 punkt 1.

Artikel 21

Annan inkomst

1. Inkomst som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar och som inte behandlas i föregående artiklar i detta
avtal beskattas endast i denna avtalsslutande stat, oav-sett
varifrån inkomsten härrör.

2. Bestämmelserna i punkt 1 tillämpas inte på inkomst, med
undantag för inkomst av fast egendom som avses i artikel 6
punkt 2, om mottagaren av inkomsten har hemvist i en
avtalsslutande stat och bedriver rörelse i den andra
avtalsslutande staten från där beläget fast driftställe eller
utövar självständig yrkesverk-samhet i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat från där belägen stadigvarande anordning,
samt den rättighet eller egendom i fråga om vilken inkomsten
betalas äger verkligt samband med det fasta driftstället eller
den stadigvarande anordningen. I sådant fall tillämpas
bestämmel-serna i artikel 7 respektive artikel 14.

3. Inkomst vilken inte behandlas i föregående artiklar i detta
avtal, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat
förvärvar och som härrör från den andra avtalsslutande staten,
får, utan hinder av bestämmelserna i föregående punkter i denna
artikel, beskattas i denna andra avtalsslutande stat.

Artikel 22

Undvikande av dubbelbeskattning

1. I enlighet med lagstiftningen i Japan beträffande avräkning
mot japansk skatt av skatt som betalas i annat land än Japan
gäller föl-jande:

a) Om person med hemvist i Japan uppbär inkomst från Sverige
som enligt bestämmelserna i detta avtal får beskattas i
Sverige, skall den svenska skatt som betalas på denna inkomst
avräknas mot den japanska skatt som påförs denna person.
Avräkningsbeloppet får emellertid inte överstiga den del av den
japanska skatten som är hänförlig till denna inkomst.

b) Om inkomsten som uppbärs i Sverige utgörs av utdelning som
bolag med hemvist i Sverige betalar till bolag med hemvist i
Japan, vilket äger minst 25 procent av antingen röstetalet för
aktierna i det bolag som betalar utdelningen eller av samtliga
aktier i detta bolag, skall vid avräkningen medtas den svenska
skatt som bolaget som betalar utdelningen erlägger på sin
inkomst.

2.h a) Om en person med hemvist i Sverige förvärvar inkomst som
enligt bestämmelserna i detta avtal får beskattas i Japan,
skall Sverige, om inte bestämmelserna i b) i denna punkt eller
artikel 10 punkt 3 föranleder annat, från den svenska skatten
på inkomsten avräkna ett belopp motsvarande den skatt som
erlagts i Japan. Avräkningsbeloppet skall emellertid inte
överstiga den del av den svenska skatten, beräknad före sådan
avräkning, som belöper på den inkomst som får beskattas i
Japan.

b) Om en person med hemvist i Sverige förvärvar inkomst som
enligt bestämmelserna i artikel 18 beskattas endast i Japan,
får Sverige - vid bestämmandet av svensk progressiv skatt -
beakta sådan inkomst som beskattas endast i Japan.

Artikel 23

Förbud mot diskriminering

1. Medborgare i en avtalsslutande stat skall inte i den andra
avtalsslutande staten bli föremål för beskattning eller därmed
sammanhängande krav som är av annat slag eller mer tyngande än
den beskattning och därmed sam-manhängande krav som medborgare
i denna andra avtalsslutande stat under samma förhållanden är
eller kan bli underkastad. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i
artikel 1 tillämpas denna bestämmelse även på person som inte
har hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat eller i båda
avtalsslutande staterna.

2. Beskattningen av fast driftställe eller stadigvarande
anordning, som person med hemvist i en avtalsslutande stat har
i den andra avtalsslutande staten, skall i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat inte vara mindre fördelaktig än
beskattningen av personer med hemvist i denna andra
avtalsslutande stat, vilka bedriver verksamhet av samma slag.

Denna bestämmelse anses inte medföra skyldighet för en
avtalsslutande stat att medge person med hemvist i den andra
avtalsslutande staten sådant personligt avdrag vid
beskattningen, sådan skattebefrielse eller skattenedsättning på
grund av civilstånd eller försörj-ningsplikt mot familj som
medges person med hemvist i den egna staten.

3. Utom i de fall då bestämmelserna i artikel 9, artikel 11
punkt 6 eller artikel 12 punkt 6 tillämpas, är ränta, royalty
och annan betal-ning från företag i en avtalsslutande stat till
person med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande staten
avdragsgilla vid bestämmandet av den beskattningsbara inkomsten
för sådant företag på samma villkor som betalning till person
med hemvist i den förstnämnda avtalsslutande staten.

4. Företag i en avtalsslutande stat, vars kapital helt eller
delvis ägs eller kontrolleras, direkt eller indirekt, av en
eller flera personer med hemvist i den andra avtalsslutande
staten, skall inte i den förstnämnda avtalsslutande staten bli
föremål för beskattning eller därmed sammanhängande krav som är
av annat slag eller mer tyngande än den beskattning och därmed
sammanhängande krav som annat liknande företag i den
förstnämnda avtalsslutande staten är eller kan bli underkastat.

5. Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i artikel 2 tillämpas
bestämmelserna i förevarande artikel på skatter av varje slag
och beskaffenhet.

Artikel 24

Förfarandet vid ömsesidig överenskommelse

1. Om en person anser att en avtalsslutande stat eller båda
avtalsslutande staterna vidtagit åtgärder som för honom medför
eller kommer att medföra beskattning som strider mot
bestämmelserna i detta avtal, kan han, utan att detta påverkar
hans rätt att använda sig av de rättsmedel som finns i dessa
avtalsslutande staters interna rättsordning, framlägga saken
för den behöriga myndigheten i den avtalsslutande stat där han
har hemvist eller, om fråga är om tillämpning av artikel 23
punkt 1, i den avtalsslutande stat där han är medborgare. Saken
skall framläggas inom tre år från den tid-punkt då personen i
fråga fick vetskap om den åtgärd som givit upphov till
beskattning som strider mot bestämmelserna i detta avtal.

2. Om den behöriga myndigheten finner invändningen grundad men
inte själv kan få till stånd en tillfredsställande lösning,
skall myn-digheten söka lösa frågan genom ömsesidig
överenskommelse med den behöriga myndig-heten i den andra
avtalsslutande staten i syfte att undvika beskattning som
strider mot bestämmelserna i detta avtal. Överenskommelse som
träffats skall genomföras utan hinder av tidsgränser i de
avtalsslutande staternas interna lagstiftning.

3. De behöriga myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna skall
genom ömsesidig överenskommelse söka avgöra svårigheter eller
tvivelsmål som uppkommer i fråga om tolkningen eller
tillämpningen av detta avtal. De kan även överlägga i syfte att
undanröja dubbelbeskattning i fall som inte omfattas av detta
avtal.

4. De behöriga myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna kan
träda i direkt förbindelse med varandra i syfte att träffa
överenskommelse i de fall som angivits i föregående punkter i
denna artikel.

Artikel 25

Utbyte av upplysningar

1. De behöriga myndigheterna i de avtalsslutande staterna skall
utbyta sådana upplysningar som är nödvändiga för att tillämpa
bestämmelserna i detta avtal eller i de avtalsslutande
staternas interna lagstiftning i fråga om skatter som omfattas
av detta avtal i den mån beskattningen enligt denna
lagstiftning inte strider mot detta avtal. Utbytet av
upplysningar begränsas inte av artikel 1. Upplysningar som en
avtalsslutande stat mottagit skall behandlas såsom hemliga på
samma sätt som upplysningar, som erhållits enligt den interna
lagstiftningen i denna avtalsslutande stat och får yppas endast
för personer eller myndigheter (däri inbegripna domstolar och
förvaltningsorgan) som fastställer, uppbär eller indriver de
skatter som omfattas av detta avtal eller handlägger åtal eller
besvär i fråga om dessa skatter. Dessa personer eller
myndigheter skall använda upplysningarna endast för sådana
ändamål. De får yppa upplysningarna vid offentlig rättegång
eller i domstolsavgöranden.

2. Bestämmelserna i punkt 1 anses inte medföra skyldighet för
en avtalsslutande stat att:

a) vidta förvaltningsåtgärder som avviker från lagstiftning och
administrativ praxis i denna avtalsslutande stat eller i den
andra av-talsslutande staten;

b) lämna upplysningar som inte är tillgängliga enligt
lagstiftning eller sedvanlig administrativ praxis i denna
avtalsslutande stat eller i den andra avtalsslutande staten;

c) lämna upplysningar som skulle röja affärshemlighet,
industri-, handels- eller yrkes-hemlighet eller i
näringsverksamhet nyttjat förfaringssätt eller upplysningar,
vilkas överlämnande skulle strida mot allmänna hänsyn (ordre
public).

Artikel 25Ai

Bistånd med indrivning

1. Vardera avtalsslutande staten skall söka indriva skatter som
påförts av den andra avtalsslutande staten för att förhindra
att befrielse från skatt eller lägre skattesatser som medges
enligt avtalet i denna andra stat åtnjuts av personer som inte
är berättigade till sådana förmåner. Den avtalsslutande stat
som driver in sådan skatt ansvarar inför den andra
avtalsslutande staten för indrivna belopp.

2. Bestämmelserna i punkt 1 medför inte skyldighet för någon av
de avtalsslutande staterna som söker indriva skatter att vidta
förvaltningsåtgärder som avviker från lagstiftning och
administrativ praxis i den avtalsslutande staten eller som
skulle strida mot allmänna hänsyn (ordre public) i den
avtalsslutande staten.

Artikel 26

Diplomatiska företrädare och konsulära tjänstemän

Bestämmelserna i detta avtal berör inte de privilegier vid
beskattningen som enligt folkrättens allmänna regler eller
bestämmelser i särskilda överenskommelser tillkommer
diplomatiska företrädare eller konsulära tjänstemän.

Artikel 27

Ikraftträdande

1. Detta avtal skall ratificeras och ratifikationshandlingarna
skall utväxlas i Tokyo snarast möjligt.

2. Detta avtal träder i kraft trettionde dagen efter den då
utväxlingen av ratifikationshandlingarna skedde och skall
tillämpas:

a) i Japan:

beträffande inkomst hänförlig till beskattningsår som börjar
den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det då avtalet träder
i kraft eller senare; och

b) i Sverige:

beträffande inkomst som förvärvas den 1 januari kalenderåret
närmast efter det då avtalet träder i kraft eller senare.

3. Avtalet mellan Japan och Sverige för undvikande av
dubbelbeskattning och förhind-rande av skatteflykt beträffande
inkomstskatter, som undertecknades i Tokyo den 12 december 1956
och som ändrades och kompletterades genom protokoll
undertecknat i Tokyo den 15 april 1964, skall upphöra att gälla
och inte längre tillämpas beträffande inkomster på vilka detta
avtal blir tillämpligt enligt bestämmelserna i punkt 2.

Artikel 28

Upphörande

Detta avtal förblir i kraft utan tidsbegränsning men envar av
de avtalsslutande staterna äger att - senast den 30 juni under
ett kalenderår, som börjar efter utgången av en tidrymd av fem
år räknat från dagen för avtalets ikraftträdande - på
diplomatisk väg skriftligen uppsäga avtalet hos den andra
avtalsslutande staten. I händelse av sådan uppsägning upphör
detta avtal att gälla:

a) i Japan:

beträffande inkomst hänförlig till beskattningsår som börjar
den 1 januari kalenderåret närmast efter det då uppsägning sker
eller senare; och

b) i Sverige:

beträffande inkomst som förvärvas den 1 januari kalenderåret
närmast efter det då uppsägning sker eller senare.

Till bekräftelse härav har undertecknade, därtill vederbörligen
bemyndigade av sina re-spektive regeringar, undertecknat detta
avtal.

Som skedde i Stockholm den 21 januari 1983 i två exemplar på
engelska språket.

För Sveriges regering:

Lennart Bodström

För Japans regering:

Wataru Owada


a Avtalet är i sin ursprungliga lydelse intagen i SFS 1983:203.
I den nu återgivna avtalstexten har iakttagits de ändringar som
skett genom protokollet den 19 februari 1999.

b Artiklarna i det undertecknade avtalet saknar rubriker. Dessa
har tillagts av redaktionella skäl.

c Artikel 2 punkt 1 b) har fått denna lydelse genom protokollet
den 19 februari 1999.

d Artikel 9 har fått denna lydelse genom protokollet den 19
februari 1999.

e Artikel 10 punkterna 2 och 3 har fått denna lydelse genom
protokollet den 19 februari 1999.

e Artikel 10 punkterna 2 och 3 har fått denna lydelse genom
protokollet den 19 februari 1999.

f Artikel 11 punkt 2 har fått denna lydelse genom protokollet
den 19 februari 1999.

g Artikel 12 punkt 2 har fått denna lydelse genom protokollet
den 19 februari 1999.

h Artikel 22 punkt 2 har fått denna lydelse genom protokollet
den 19 februari 1999.

i Artikel 25A har tillagts genom protokollet den 19 februari
1999.
Lag (1999:891).
