


Artiklarna 1-16 och 18-21 i konventionen den 19 juni 1
980 om
tillämplig lag för avtalsförpliktelser (Romkonventionen) samt
artiklarna 1-4 i det första protokollet om Europeiska
gemenskapernas domstols tolkning av konventionen skall gälla
som lag här i landet med de anpassningar och ändringar som har
gjorts genom tillträdeskonventionerna den 10 april 1984, den 18
maj 1992 och den 29 november 1996.

De danska, engelska, finska, franska, grekiska, iriska,
italienska, nederländska, portugisiska, spanska, svenska och
tyska texterna av Romkonventionen och protokollet skall ha lika
giltighet.

Romkonventionens och protokollets svenska, engelska och franska
texter finns intagna som en bilaga till denna lag.

Övergångsbestämmelser

1998:167

Denna lag träder i kraft, i fråga om Romkonventionen den 1 juli
1998 och i fråga om protokollet den dag regeringen bestämmer.

Lagen skall såvitt den avser Romkonventionen inte tillämpas på
avtal som har ingåtts före den 1 juli 1998.

2004:650

Regeringen föreskriver att lagen (1998:167) om tillämplig lag
för avtalsförpliktelser, i fråga om Romkonventionens protokoll,
skall träda i kraft den 1 augusti 2004.


CONVENTION ON THE LAW APPLICABLE TO CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS

opened for signature in Rome on 19 June 1980 (80/934/EEC)

PREAMBLE
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES to the Treaty establishing the
European Economic Community,

ANXIOUS to continue in the field of private international law
the work of unification of law which has already been done
within the Community, in particular in the field of
jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments,

WISHING to establish uniform rules concerning the law
applicable to contractual obligations,

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

TITLE I

SCOPE OF THE CONVENTION

Article 1

Scope of the Convention

1. The rules of this Convention shall apply to contractual
obligations in any situation involving a choice between the
laws of different countries.

2. They shall not apply to:

(a) questions involving the status or legal capacity of natural
persons, without prejudice to Article 11;

(b) contractual obligations relating to:

- wills and succession,

- rights in property arising out of a matrimonial relationship,

- rights and duties arising out of a family relationship,
parentage, marriage or affinity, including maintenance
obligations in respect of children who are not legitimate;

(c) obligations arising under bills of exchange, cheques and
promissory notes and other negotiable instruments to the extent
that the obligations under such other negotiable instruments
arise out of their negotiable character;

(d) arbitration agreements and agreements on the choice of
court;

(e) questions governed by the law of companies and other bodies
corporate or unincorporate such as the creation, by
registration or otherwise, legal capacity, internal
organization or winding up of companies and other bodies
corporate or unincorporate and the personal liability of
officers and members as such for the obligations of the company
or body;

(f) the question whether an agent is able to bind a principal,
or an organ to bind a company or body corporate or
unincorporate, to a third party;

g) the constitution of trusts and the relationship between
settlors, trustees and beneficiaries;

h) evidence and procedure, without prejudice to Article 14.

3. The rules of this Convention do not apply to contracts of
insurance which cover risks situated in the territories of the
Member States of the European Economic Community. In order to
determine whether a risk is situated in these territories the
court shall apply its internal law.

4. The preceding paragraph does not apply to contracts of
reinsurance.

Article 2

Application of law of non-contracting States

Any law specified by this Convention shall be applied whether
or not it is the law of a Contracting State.

TITLE II

UNIFORM RULES

Article 3

Freedom of choice

1. A contract shall be governed by the law chosen by the
parties. The choice must be expressed or demonstrated with
reasonable certainty by the terms of the contract or the
circumstances of the case. By their choice the parties can
select the law applicable to the whole or a part only of the
contract.

2. The parties may at any time agree to subject the contract to
a law other than that which previously governed it, whether as
a result of an earlier choice under this Article or of other
provisions of this Convention. Any variation by the parties of
the law to be applied made after the conclusion of the contract
shall not prejudice its formal validity under Article 9 or
adversely affect the rights of third parties.

3. The fact that the parties have chosen a foreign law, whether
or not accompanied by the choice of a foreign tribunal, shall
not, where all the other elements relevant to the situation at
the time of the choice are connected with one country only,
prejudice the applicaiton of rules of the law of that country
which cannot be derogated from by contract, hereinafter called
'mandatory rules'.

4. The existence and validity of the consent of the parties as
to the choice of the applicable law shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of Articles 8, 9 and 11.

Article 4

Applicable law in the absence of choice

1. To the extent that the law applicable to the contract has
not been chosen in accordance with Article 3, the contract
shall be governed by the law of the country with which it is
most closely connected. Nevertheless, a severable part of the
contract which has a closer connection with another country may
by way of exception be governed by the law of that other
country.

2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Article, it
shall be presumed that the contract is most closely connected
with the country where the party who is to effect the per-
formance which is characteristic of the contract has, at the
time of conclusion of the contract, his habitual residence, or,
in the case of a body corporate or unincorporate, its central
administration. However, if the contract is entered into in the
course of that partys trade or profession, that country shall
be the country in which the principal place of business is
situated or, where under the terms of the contract the
performance is to be effected through a place of business other
than the principal place of business, the country in which that
other place of business is situated.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2 of this
Article, to the extent that the subject matter of the contract
is a right in immovable property or a right to use immovable
property it shall be presumed that the contract is most closely
connected with the country where the immovable property is
situated.

4. A contract for the carriage of goods shall not be subject to
the presumption in paragraph 2. In such a contract if the
country in which, at the time the contract is concluded, the
carrier has his principal place of business is also the country
in which the place of loading or the place of discharge or the
principal place of business of the consignor is situated, it
shall be presumed that the contract is most closely connected
with that country. In applying this paragraph single voyage
charterparties and other contracts the main purpose of which is
the carriage of goods shall be treated as contracts for the
carriage of goods.

5. Paragraph 2 shall not apply if the characteristic
performance cannot be determined, and the presumptions in
paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall be disregarded if it appears from
the circumstances as a whole that the contract is more closely
connected with another country.

Article 5

Certain consumer contracts

1. This Article applies to a contract the object of which is
the supply of goods or services to a person ('the consumer')
for a purpose which can be regarded as being outside his trade
or profession, or a contract for the provision of credit for
that object.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, a choice of law
made by the parties shall not have the result of depriving the
consumer of the protection afforded to him by the mandatory
rules of the law of the country in which he has his habitual
residence:

- if in that country the conclusion of the contract was
preceded by a specific invitation addressed to him or by
advertising, and he had taken in that country all the steps
necessary on his part for the conclusion of the contract, or

- if the other party or his agent received the consumer's order
in that country, or

- if the contract is for the sale of goods and the consumer
travelled from that country to another country and there gave
his order, provided that the consumers journey was arranged by
the seller for the purpose of inducing the consumer to buy.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 4, a contract to
which this Article applies shall, in the absence of choice in
accordance with Article 3, be governed by the law of the
country in which the consumer has his habitual residence if it
is entered into in the circumstances described in paragraph 2
of this Article.

4. This Article shall not apply to:

(a) a contract of carriage;

(b) a contract for the supply of services where the services
are to be supplied to the consumer exclusively in a country
other than that in which he has his habitual residence.

5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 4, this Article
shall apply to a contract which, for an inclusive price,
provides for a combination of travel and accommodation.

Article 6

Individual employment contracts

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, in a contract
of employment a choice of law made by the parties shall not
have the result of depriving the employee of the protection
afforded to him by the mandatory rules of the law which would
be applicable under paragraph 2 in the absence of choice.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 4, a contract of
employment shall, in the absence of choice in accordance with
Article 3, be governed:

(a) by the law of the country in which the employee habitually
carries out his work in performance of the contract, even if he
is temporarily employed in another country; or

(b) if the employee does not habitually carry out his work in
any one country, by the law of the country in which the place
of business through which he was engaged is situated;

unless it appears from the circumstances as a whole that the
contract is more closely connected with another country, in
which case the contract shall be governed by the law of that
country.

Article 7

Mandatory rules

1. When applying under this Convention the law of a country,
effect may be given to the mandatory rules of the law of
another country with which the situation has a close
connection, if and in so far as, under the law of the latter
country, those rules must be applied whatever the law
applicable to the contract. In considering whether to give
effect to these mandatory rules, regard shall be had to their
nature and purpose and to the consequences of their application
or non-application.

2. Nothing in this Convention shall restrict the application of
the rules of the law of the forum in a situation where they are
mandatory irrespective of the law otherwise applicable to the
contract.

Article 8

Material validity

1. The existence and validity of a contract, or of any term of
a contract, shall be determined by the law which would govern
it under this Convention if the contract or term were valid.

2. Nevertheless a party may rely upon the law of the country in
which he has his habitual residence to establish that he did
not consent if it appears from the circumstances that it would
not be reasonable to determine the effect of his conduct in
accordance with the law specified in the preceding paragraph.

Article 9

Formal validity

1. A contract concluded between persons who are in the same
country is formally valid if it satisfies the formal
requirements of the law which governs it under this Convention
or of the law of the country where it is concluded.

2. A contract concluded between persons who are in different
countries is formally valid if it satisfies the formal
requirements of the law which governs it under this Convention
or of the law of one of those countries.

3. Where a contract is concluded by an agent, the country in
which the agent acts is the relevant country for the purposes
of paragraphs 1 and 2.

4. An act intended to have legal effect relating to an existing
or contemplated contract is formally valid if it satisfies the
formal requirements of the law which under this Convention
governs or would govern the contract or of the law of the
country where the act was done.

5. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs shall not apply
to a contract to which Article 5 applies, concluded in the
circumstances described in paragraph 2 of Article 5. The formal
validity of such a contract is governed by the law of the
country in which the consumer has his habitual residence.

6. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, a
contract the subject matter of which is a right in immovable
property or a right to use immovable property shall be subject
to the mandatory requirements of form of the law of the country
where the property is situated if by that law those require-
ments are imposed irrespective of the country where the
contract is concluded and irrespective of the law governing the
contract.

Article 10

Scope of the applicable law

1. The law applicable to a contract by virtue of Articles 3 to
6 and 12 of this Convention shall govern in particular:

(a) interpretation;

(b) performance;

(c) within the limits of the powers conferred on the court by
its procedural law, the consequences of breach, including the
assessment of damages in so far as it is governed by rules of
law;

(d) the various ways of extinguishing obligations, and
prescription and limitation of actions;

(e) the consequences of nullity of the contract.

2. In relation to the manner of performance and the steps to be
taken in the event of defective performance regard shall be had
to the law of the country in which performance takes place.

Article 11

Incapacity

In a contract concluded between persons who are in the same
country, a natural person who would have capacity under the law
of that country may invoke his incapacity resulting from
another law only if the other party to the contract was aware
of this incapacity at the time of the conclusion of the
contract or was not aware thereof as a result of negligence.

Article 12

Voluntary assignment

1. The mutual obligations of assignor and assignee under a
voluntary assignment of a right against another person ('the
debtor') shall be governed by the law which under this
Convention applies to the contract between the assignor and
assignee.

2. The law governing the right to which the assignment relates
shall determine its assignability, the relationship between the
assignee and the debtor, the conditions under which the
assignment can be invoked against the debtor and any question
whether the debtor's obligations have been discharged.

Article 13

Subrogation

1. Where a person ('the creditor') has a contractual claim upon
another ('the debtor'), and a third person has a duty to
satisfy the creditor, or has in fact satisfied the creditor in
discharge of that duty, the law which governs the third
person's duty to satisfy the creditor shall determine whether
the third person is entitled to exercise against the debtor the
rights which the creditor had against the debtor under the law
governing their relationship and, if so, whether he may do so
in full or only to a limited extent.

2. The same rule applies where several persons are subject to
the same contractual claim and one of them has satisfied the
creditor.

Article 14

Burden of proof, etc.

1. The law governing the contract under this Convention applies
to the extent that it contains, in the law of contract, rules
which raise presumptions of law or determine the burden of
proof.

2. A contract or an act intended to have legal effect may be
proved by any mode of proof recognized by the law of the forum
or by any of the laws referred to in Article 9 under which that
contract or act is formally valid, provided that such mode of
proof can be administered by the forum.

Article 15

Exclusion of renvoi

The application of the law of any country specified by this
Convention means the application of the rules of law in force
in that country other than its rules of private international
law.

Article 16

'Ordre public'

The application of a rule of the law of any country specified
by this Convention may be refused only if such application is
manifestly incompatible with the public policy ('ordre public')
of the forum.

Article 17

No retrospective effect

This Convention shall apply in a Contracting State to contracts
made after the date on which this Convention has entered into
force with respect to that State.

Article 18

Uniform interpretation

In the interpretation and application of the preceding uniform
rules, regard shall be had to their international character and
to the desirability of achieving uniformity in their
interpretation and application.

Article 19

States with more than one legal system

1. Where a State comprises several territorial units each of
which has its own rules of law in respect of contractual
obligations, each territorial unit shall be considered as a
country for the purposes of identifying the law applicable
under this Convention.

2. A State within which different territorial units have their
own rules of law in respect of contractual obligations shall
not be bound to apply this Convention to conflicts solely
between the laws of such units.

Article 20

Precedence of Community law

This Convention shall not affect the application of provisions
which, in relation to particular matters, lay down choice of
law rules relating to contractual obligations and which are or
will be contained in acts of the institutions of the European
Communities or in national laws harmonized in implementation of
such acts.

Article 21

Relationship with other conventions

This Convention shall not prejudice the application of
international conventions to which a Contracting State is, or
becomes, a party.

Article 22

Reservations

1. Any Contracting State may, at the time of signature,
ratification, acceptance or approval, reserve the right not to
apply:

(a) the provisions of Article 7 (1);

(b) the provisions of Article 10 (1) (e).

2. [Deleted]

3. Any Contracting State may at any time withdraw a reservation
which it has made; the reservation shall cease to have effect
on the first day of the third calendar month after notification
of the withdrawal.

TITLE III

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 23

1. If, after the date on which this Convention has entered into
force for a Contracting State, that State wishes to adopt any
new choice of law rule in regard to any particular category of
contract within the scope of this Convention, it shall
communicate its intention to the other signatory States through
the Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities.

2. Any signatory State may, within six months from the date of
the communication made to the Secretary-General, request him to
arrange consultations between signatory States in order to
reach agreement.

3. If no signatory State has requested consultations within
this period or if within two years following the communication
made to the Secretary-General no agreement is reached in the
course of consultations, the Contracting State concerned may
amend its law in the manner indicated. The measures taken by
that State shall be brought to the knowledge of the other
signatory States through the Secretary-General of the Council
of the European Communities.

Article 24

1. If, after the date on which this Convention has entered into
force with respect to a Contracting State, that State wishes to
become a party to a multilateral convention whose principal aim
or one of whose principal aims is to lay down rules of private
international law concerning any of the matters governed by
this Convention, the procedure set out in Article 23 shall
apply. However, the period of two years, referred to in
paragraph 3 of that Article, shall be reduced to one year.

2. The procedure referred to in the preceding paragraph need
not be followed if a Contracting State or one of the European
Communities is already a party to the multilateral convention,
or if its object is to revise a convention to which the State
concerned is already a party, or if it is a convention
concluded within the framework of the Treaties establishing the
European Communities.

Article 25

If a Contracting State considers that the unification achieved
by this Convention is prejudiced by the conclusion of
agreements not covered by Article 24 (1), that State may
request the Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities to arrange consultations between the signatory
States of this Convention.

Article 26

Any Contracting State may request the revision of this
Convention. In this event a revision conference shall be
convened by the President of the Council of the European
Communities.

Article 27

[Deleted]

Article 28

1. This Convention shall be open from 19 June 1980 for
signature by the States party to the Treaty establishing the
European Economic Community.

2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance
or approval by the signatory States. The instruments of
ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities.

Article 29

1. This Convention shall enter into force on the first day of
the third month following the deposit of the seventh instrument
of ratification, acceptance or approval.

2. This Convention skall enter into force for each signatory
State ratifying, accepting or approving at a later date on the
first day of the third month following the deposit of its
instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.

Article 30

1. This Convention shall remain in force for 10 years from the
date of its entry into force in accordance with Article 29 (1),
even for States for which it enters into force at a later date.

2. If there has been no denunciation it shall be renewed
tacitly every five years.

3. A Contracting State which wishes to denounce shall, not less
than six months before the expiration of the period of 10 or
five years, as the case may be, give notice to the Secretary-
General of the Council of the European Communities.

4. The denunciation shall have effect only in relation to the
State which has notified it. The Convention will remain in
force as between all other Contracting States.

Article 31

The Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities shall notify the States party to the Treaty
establishing the European Economic Community of:

(a) the signatures;

(b) the deposit of each instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval;

(c) the date of entry into force of this Convention;

(d) communications made in pursuance of Articles 23, 24, 25, 26
and 30;

(e) the reservations and withdrawals of reservations referred
to in Article 22.

Article 32

The Protocol annexed to this Convention shall form an integral
part thereof.

Article 33

This Convention, drawn up in a single original in the Danish,
Dutch, English, French, German, Irish and Italian languages,
these texts being equally authentic, shall be deposited in the
archives of the Secretariat of the Council of the European
Communities. The Secretary-General shall transmit a certified
copy thereof to the Government of each signatory State.


/Träder i kraft I:den dagen regeringen bestämmer/
PROTOCOL

Notwithstanding the provisions of the Convention, Denmark,
Sweden and Finland may retain national provisions concerning
the law applicable to questions relating to the carriage of
goods by sea and may amend such provisions without following
the procedure provided for in Article 23 of the Convention of
Rome. The national provisions applicable in this respect are
the following:

- in Denmark, paragraphs 252 and 321 (3) and (4) of the "Sølov"
(maritime law),

- in Sweden, Chapter 13, Article 2 (1) and (2), and Chapter 14,
Article 1 (3), of "sjölagen" (maritime law),

- in Finland, Chapter 13, Article 2 (1) and (2), and Chapter
14, Article 1 (3), of "merilaki"/"sjölagen" (maritime law).

JOINT DECLARATION

At the time of the signature of the Convention on the law
applicable to contractual obligations, the Governments of the
Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal
Republic of Germany, the French Republic, Ireland, the Italian
Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland,

I. anxious to avoid, as far as possible, dispersion of choice
of law rules among several instruments and differences between
these rules, express the wish that the institutions of the
European Communities, in the exercise of their powers under the
Treaties by which they were established will, where the need
arises, endeavour to adopt choice of law rules which are as far
as possible consistent with those of this Convention;

II. declare their intention as from the date of signature of
this Convention until becoming bound by Article 24, to consult
with each other if any one of the signatory States wishes to
become a party to any convention to which the procedure
referred to in Article 24 would apply;

III. having regard to the contribution of the Convention on the
law applicable to contractual obligations to the unification of
choise of law rules within the European Communities, express
the view that any State which becomes a member of the European
Communities should accede to this Convention.

JOINT DECLARATION

The Governments of the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of
Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic,
Ireland, the Italian Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland,

On signing the Convention on the law applicable to contractual
obligations;

Desiring to ensure that the Convention is applied as
effectively as possible;

Anxious to prevent differences of interpretation of the
Convention from impairing its unifying effect;

Declare themselves ready:

1. to examine the possibility of conferring jurisdiction in
certain matters on the Court of Justice of the European
Communities and, if necessary, to negotiate an agreement to
this effect;

2. to arrange meetings at regular intervals between their
representatives.


CONVENTION SUR LA LOI APPLICABLE AUX OBLIGATIONS CONTRACTUELLES

ouverte à la signature à Rome le 19 juin 1980 (80/934/CEE)

PRÉAMBULE
LES HAUTES PARTIES CONTRACTANTES au traité instituant la
Communauté économique européenne,

SOUCIEUSES de poursuivre, dans le domaine du droit
international privé, loeuvre dunification juridique déjà
entreprise dans la Communauté, notamment en matière de
compétence judiciaire et dexécution des jugements,

DÉSIRANT établir des règles uniformes concernant la loi
applicable aux obligations contractuelles,

SONT CONVENUES DES DISPOSITIONS QUI SUIVENT:

TITRE PREMIER

CHAMP DAPPLICATION

Article premier

Champ dapplication

1. Les dispositions de la présente convention sont applicables,
dans les situations comportant un conflit de lois, aux
obligations contractuelles.

2. Elles ne sappliquent pas:

a) à létat et à la capacité des personnes physiques, sous
réserve de larticle 11;

b) aux obligations contractuelles concernant:

- les testaments et successions,

- les régimes matrimoniaux,

- les droits et devoirs découlant des relations de famille, de
parenté, de mariage ou dalliance, y compris les obligations
alimentaires envers les enfants non légitimes;

c) aux obligations nées de lettres de change, chèques, billets
à ordre ainsi que dautres instruments négociables, dans la
mesure où les obligations nées de ces autres instruments
dérivent de leur caractère négociable;

d) aux conventions darbitrage et délection de for;

e) aux questions relevant du droit des sociétés, associations
et personnes morales, telles que la constitution, la capacité
juridique, le fonctionnement interne et la dissolution des
sociétés, associations et personnes morales, ainsi que la
responsabilité personnelle légale des associés et des organes
pour les dettes de la société, association ou personne morale;

f) à la question de savoir si un intermédiaire peut engager
envers les tiers la personne pour le compte de laquelle il
prétend agir ou si un organe dune société, dune association
ou dune personne morale peut engager envers les tiers cette
société, association ou personne morale;

g) à la constitution des trusts, aux relations quils créent
entre les constituants, les trustees et les bénéficiaires;

h) à la preuve et à la procédure, sous réserve de larticle 14.

3. Les dispositions de la présente convention ne sappliquent
pas aux contrats dassurance qui couvrent des risques situés
dans les territoires des États membres de la Communauté
économique européenne. Pour déterminer si un risque est situé
dans ces territoires, le juge applique sa loi interne.

4. Le paragraphe précédent ne concerne pas les contrats de
réassurance.

Article 2

Caractère universel

La loi désignée par la présente convention sapplique même si
cette loi est celle dun État non contractant.

TITRE II

RÈGLES UNIFORMES

Article 3

Liberté de choix

1. Le contrat est régi par la loi choisie par les parties. Ce
choix doit être exprès ou résulter de façon certaine des
dispositions du contrat ou des circonstances de la cause. Par
ce choix, les parties peuvent désigner la loi applicable à la
totalité ou à une partie seulement de leur contrat.

2. Les parties peuvent convenir, à tout moment, de faire régir
le contrat par une loi autre que celle qui le régissait
auparavant soit en vertu dun choix antérieur selon le présent
article, soit en vertu dautres dispositions de la présente
convention. Toute modification quant à la détermination de la
loi applicable, intervenue postéri-eurement à la conclusion du
contrat, naffecte pas la validité formelle du contrat au sens
de

larticle 9 et ne porte pas atteinte aux droits des tiers.

3. Le choix par les parties dune loi étrangère, assorti ou non
de celui dun tribunal étranger, ne peut, lorsque tous les
autres éléments de la situation sont localisés au moment de ce
choix dans un seul pays, porter atteinte aux dispositions
auxquelles la loi de ce pays ne permet pas de déroger par
contrat, ciaprès dénommées «dispositions impératives».

4. Lexistence et la validité du consentement des parties quant
au choix de la loi applicable sont régies par les dispositions
établies aux articles 8, 9 et 11.

Article 4

Loi applicable à défaut de choix

1. Dans la mesure où la loi applicable au contrat n´a pas été
choisie conformément aux dispositions de larticle 3, le
contrat est régi par la loi du pays avec lequel il présente les
liens les plus étroits. Toutefois, si une partie du contrat est
séparable du reste du contrat et présente un lien plus étroit
avec un autre pays, il pourra être fait application, à titre
exceptionnel, à cette partie du contrat de la loi de cet autre
pays.

2. Sous réserve du paragraphe 5, il est présumé que le contrat
présente les liens les plus étroits avec le pays où la partie
qui doit fournir la prestation caractéristique a, au moment de
la conclusion du contrat, sa résidence habituelle ou, s'il
s'agit dune société, association ou personne morale, son
administration centrale. Toutefois, si le contrat est conclu
dans lexercice de lactivité professionnelle de cette partie,
ce pays est celui où est situé son principal établissement ou,
si, selon le contrat, la prestation doit être fournie par un
établissement autre que l'établissement principal, celui où est
situé cet autre établissement.

3. Nonobstant les dispositions du paragraphe 2, dans la mesure
où le contrat a pour objet un droit réel immobilier ou un droit
dutilisation dun immeuble, il est présumé que le contrat
présente les liens les plus étroits avec le pays où est situé
limmeuble.

4. Le contrat de transport de marchandises nest pas soumis à
la présomption du paragraphe 2. Dans ce contrat, si le pays
dans lequel le transporteur a son établissement principal au
moment de la conclusion du contrat est aussi celui dans lequel
est situé le lieu de chargement ou de déchargement ou
l'établissement principal de lexpéditeur, il est présumé que
le contrat a les liens les plus étroits avec ce pays. Pour
lapplication du présent paragraphe, sont considérés comme
contrats de transport de marchandises les contrats
daffrètement pour un seul voyage ou dautres contrats
lorsquils ont principalement pour objet de réaliser un
transport de marchandises.

5. Lapplication du paragraphe 2 est écartée lorsque la
prestation caractéristique ne peut être déterminée. Les
présomptions des paragraphes 2, 3 et 4 sont écartées lorsquil
résulte de lensemble des circonstances que le contrat présente
des liens plus étroits avec un autre pays.

Article 5

Contrats conclus par les consommateurs

1. Le présent article sapplique aux contrats ayant pour objet
la fourniture dobjets mobiliers corporels ou de services à une
personne, le consommateur, pour un usage pouvant être considéré
comme étranger à son activité professionnelle, ainsi quaux
contrats destinés au financement dune telle fourniture.

2. Nonobstant les dispositions de larticle 3, le choix par les
parties de la loi applicable ne peut avoir pour résultat de
priver le consommateur de la protection que lui assurent les
dispositions impératives de la loi du pays dans lequel il a sa
résidence habituelle:

- si la conclusion du contrat a été précédée dans ce pays dune
proposition spécialement faite ou dune publicité, et si le
consommateur a accompli dans ce pays les actes nécessaires à la
conclusion du contrat, ou

- si le cocontractant du consommateur ou son représentant a
reçu la commande du consommateur dans ce pays, ou

- si le contrat est une vente de marchandises et que le
consommateur se soit rendu de ce pays dans un pays étranger et
y ait passé la commande, à la condition que le voyage ait été
organisé par le vendeur dans le but dinciter le consommateur à
conclure une vente.

3. Nonobstant les dispositions de larticle 4 et à défaut de
choix exercé conformément à larticle 3, ces contrats sont
régis par la loi du pays dans lequel le consommateur a sa
résidence habituelle, sils sont intervenus dans les
circonstances décrites au paragraphe 2 du présent article.

4. Le présent article ne sapplique pas:

a) au contrat de transport;

b) au contrat de fourniture de services lorsque les services
dus au consommateur doivent être fournis exclusivement dans un
pays autre que celui dans lequel il a sa résidence habituelle.

5.Nonobstant les dispositions du paragraphe 4, le présent
article sapplique au contrat offrant pour un prix global des
prestations combinées de transport et de logement.

Article 6

Contrat individuel de travail

1. Nonobstant les dispositions de larticle 3, dans le contrat
de travail, le choix par les parties de la loi applicable ne
peut avoir pour résultat de priver le travailleur de la
protection qui lui assurent les dispositions impératives de la
loi qui serait applicable, à défaut de choix, en vertu du
paragraphe 2 du présent article.

2. Nonobstant les dispositions de larticle 4 et à défaut de
choix exercé conformément à larticle 3, le contrat de travail
est régi:

a) par la loi du pays où le travailleur, en exécution du
contrat, accomplit habituellement son travail, même sil est
détaché à titre temporaire dans un autre pays, ou

b) si le travailleur naccomplit pas habituellement son travail
dans un même pays, par la loi du pays où se trouve
létablissement qui a embauché le travailleur,

à moins quil ne résulte de lensemble des circonstances que le
contrat de travail présente des liens plus étroits avec un
autre pays, auquel cas la loi de cet autre pays est applicable.

Article 7

Lois de police

1. Lors de lapplication, en vertu de la présente convention,
de la loi dun pays déterminé, il pourra être donné effet aux
dispositions impératives de la loi dun autre pays avec lequel
la situation présente un lien étroit, si et dans la mesure oú,
selon le droit de ce dernier pays, ces dispositions sont
applicables quelle que soit la loi régissant le contrat. Pour
décider si effet doit être donné à ces dispositions
impératives, il sera tenu compte de leur nature et de leur
objet ainsi que des conséquences qui découleraient de leur
application ou de leur non-application.

2. Les dispositions de la présente convention ne pourront
porter atteinte á lapplication des règles de la loi du pays du
juge qui régissent impérativement la situation quelle que soit
la loi applicable au contrat.

Article 8

Consentement et validité au fond

1. Lexistence et la validité du contrat ou d´une disposition
de celuici sont soumises à la loi qui serait applicable en
vertu de la présente convention si le contrat ou la disposition
étaient valables.

2. Toutefois, pour établir quelle na pas consenti, une partie
peut se référer à la loi du pays dans lequel elle a sa
résidence habituelle sil résulte des circonstances quil ne
serait pas raisonnable de déterminer leffet du comportement de
cette partie daprés la loi prévue au paragraphe précédent.

Article 9

Forme

1. Un contrat conclu entre des personnes qui se trouvent dans
un même pays est valable quant à la forme sil satisfait aux
conditions de forme de la loi qui le régit au fond en vertu de
la présente convention ou de la loi du pays dans lequel il a
été conclu.

2. Un contrat conclu entre des personnes qui se trouvent dans
des pays différents est valable quant à la forme sil satisfait
aux conditions de forme de la loi qui le régit au fond en vertu
de la présente convention ou de la loi de lun de ces pays.

3. Lorsque le contrat est conclu par un représentant, le pays
où le représentant se trouve au moment où il agit est celui qui
doit être pris en considération pour lapplication des
paragraphes 1 et 2.

4. Un acte juridique unilatéral relatif à un contrat conclu ou
à conclure est valable quant à la forme sil satisfait aux
conditions de forme de la loi qui régit ou régirait au fond le
contrat en vertu de la présente convention ou de la loi du pays
dans lequel cet acte est intervenu.

5. Les dispositions des paragraphes précédents ne sappliquent
pas aux contrats qui entrent dans le champ dapplication de
larticle 5 conclus dans les circonstances qui y sont décrites
au paragraphe 2. La forme de ces contrats est régie par la loi
du pays dans lequel le consommateur a sa résidence habituelle.

6. Nonobstant les dispositions des quatre premiers paragraphes
du présent article, tout contrat ayant pour objet un droit réel
immobilier ou un droit dutilisation dun immeuble est soumis
aux règles de forme impératives de la loi du pays où limmeuble
est situé, pour autant que selon cette loi elles sappliquent
indépendamment du lieu de conclusion du contrat et de la loi le
régissant au fond.

Article 10

Domaine de la loi du contrat

1. La loi applicable au contrat en vertu des articles 3 à 6 et
de larticle 12 de la présente convention régit notamment:

a) son interprétation;

b) lexécution des obligations quil engendre;

c) dans les limites des pouvoirs attribués au tribunal par sa
loi de procédure, les conséquences de linexécution totale ou
partielle de ces obligations, y compris lévaluation du dommage
dans la mesure où des règles de droit la gouvernent;

d) les divers modes dextinction des obligations, ainsi que les
prescriptions et déchéances fondées sur lexpiration dun
délai;

e) les conséquences de la nullité du contrat.

2. En ce qui concerne les modalités dexécution et les mesures
à prendre par le créancier en cas de défaut dans lexécution on
aura égard à la loi du pays où lexécution a lieu.

Article 11

Incapacité

Dans un contrat conclu entre personnes se trouvant dans un même
pays, une personne physique qui serait capable selon la loi de
ce pays ne peut invoquer son incapacité résultant dune autre
loi que si, au moment de la conclusion du contrat, le
cocontractant a connu cette incapacité ou ne la ignorée quen
raison dune imprudence de sa part.

Article 12

Cession de créance

1. Les obligations entre le cédant et le cessionnaire dune
créance sont régies par la loi qui, en vertu de la présente
convention, sapplique au contrat qui les lie.

2. La loi qui régit la créance cédée détermine le caractère
cessible de celleci, les rapports entre cessionnaire et
débiteur, les conditions dopposabilité de la cession au
débiteur et le caractère libératoire de la prestation faite par
le débiteur.

Article 13

Subrogation

1. Lorsquen vertu dun contrat, une personne, le créancier, a
des droits à légard dune autre personne, le débiteur, et
quun tiers a lobligation de désintéresser le créancier ou
encore que le tiers a désintéressé le créancier en exécution de
cette obligation, la loi applicable à cette obligation du tiers
détermine si celuici peut exercer en tout ou en partie les
droits détenus par le créancier contre le débiteur selon la loi
régissant leurs relations.

2. La même règle sapplique lorsque plusieurs personnes sont
tenues de la même obligation contractuelle et que le créancier
a été désintéressé par lune delles.

Article 14

Preuve

1. La loi régissant le contrat en vertu de la présente
convention sapplique dans la mesure où, en matière
dobligations contractuelles, elle établit des présomptions
légales ou répartit la charge de la preuve.

2. Les actes juridiques peuvent être prouvés par tout mode de
preuve admis soit par la loi du for, soit par lune des lois
visées à larticle 9, selon laquelle lacte est valable quant à
la forme, pour autant que la preuve puisse être administrée
selon ce mode devant le tribunal saisi.

Article 15

Exclusion du renvoi

Lorsque la présente convention prescrit lapplication de la loi
dun pays, elle entend les règles de droit en vigueur dans ce
pays à lexclusion des règles de droit international privé.

Article 16

Ordre public

L`application dune disposition de la loi désignée par la
présente convention ne peut être écartée que si cette
application est manifestement incompatible avec lordre public
du for.

Article 17

Application dans le temps

La convention sapplique dans un État contractant aux contrats
conclus après son entrée en vigueur pour cet État.

Article 18

Interprétation uniforme

Aux fins de linterprétation et de lapplication des règles
uniformes qui précèdent, il sera tenu compte de leur caractère
international et de lopportunité de parvenir á luniformité
dans la façon dont elles sont interprétées et appliquées.

Article 19

Systèmes non unifiés

1. Lorsquun État comprend plusieurs unités territoriales dont
chacune a ses propres règles en matière dobligations
contractuelles, chaque unité territoriale est considérée comme
un pays aux fins de la détermination de la loi applicable selon
la présente convention.

2. Un État dans lequel différentes unités territoriales ont
leurs propres règles de droit en matière dobligations
contractuelles ne sera pas tenu dappliquer la présente
convention aux conflits de lois intéressant uniquement ces
unités territoriales.

Article 20

Priorité du droit communautaire

La présente convention ne préjuge pas lapplication des
dispositions qui, dans des matières particulières, règlent les
conflits de lois en matière dobligations contractuelles et qui
sont ou seront contenues dans les actes émanant des
institutions des Communautés européennes ou dans les
législations nationales harmonisées en exécution de ces actes.

Article 21

Relations avec d´autres conventions

La présente convention ne porte pas atteinte à lapplication
des conventions internationales auxquelles un État contractant
est ou sera partie.

Article 22

Réserves

1. Tout État contractant, au moment de la signature, de la
ratification, de l´acceptation ou de lapprobation, pourra se
réserver le droit de ne pas appliquer:

a) larticle 7 paragraphe 1;

b) larticle 10 paragraphe 1 sous

e).

2. [Supprimé]

3. Tout État contractant pourra à tout moment retirer une
réserve quil aura faite; leffet de la réserve cessera le
premier jour du troisième mois du calendrier après la
notification du retrait.

TITRE III

CLAUSES FINALES

Article 23

1. Si, après la date dentrée en vigueur de la présente
convention à son égard, un État contractant désire adopter une
nouvelle règle de conflit de lois pour une catégorie
particulière de contrats entrant dans le champ dapplication de
la convention, il communique son intention aux autres États
signataires par lintermédiaire du secrétaire général du
Conseil des Communautés européennes.

2. Dans un délai de six mois à partir de la communication faite
au secrétaire général, tout État signataire peut demander à
celuici dorganiser des consultations entre États signataires
en vue darriver à un accord.

3. Si, dans ce délai, aucun État signataire na demandé la
consultation ou si, dans les deux ans qui suivront la
communication faite au secrétaire général, aucun accord nest
intervenu à la suite des consultations, lÉtat contractant peut
modifier son droit. La mesure prise par cet État est portée à
la conniaissance des autres États signataires par
lintermédiaire du secrétaire général du Conseil des
Communautés européennes.

Article 24

1. Si, après la date dentrée en vigueur de la présente
convention à son égard, un État contractant désire devenir
partie à une convention multilatérale dont lobjet principal ou
lun des objets principaux est un règlement de droit
international privé dans lune des matières régies par la
présente convention, il est fait application de la procédure
prévue à larticle 23. Toutefois, le délai de deux ans, prévu
au paragraphe 3 de larticle 23, est ramené à un an.

2. La procédure prévue au paragraphe précédent nest pas suivie
si un État contractant ou lune des Communautés européennes
sont déjà parties à la convention multilatérale ou si lobjet
de celleci est de réviser une convention à laquelle lÉtat
intéressé est partie ou sil sagit dune convention conclue
dans le cadre des traités instituant les Communautés
européennes.

Article 25

Lorsquun État contractant considère que lunification réalisée
par la présente convention est comprise par la conclusion
daccords non prévus à larticle 24 paragraphe 1, cet État peut
demander au secrétaire général du Conseil des Communautés
européennes dorganiser une consultation entre les États
signataires de la présente convention.

Article 26

Chaque État contractant peut demander la révision de la
présente convention. Dans ce cas, une conférence de révision
est convoquée par le président du Conseil des Communautés
européennes.

Article 27

[Supprimé]

Article 28

1. La présente convention est ouverte à compter du 19 juin 1980
à la signature des Ètats parties au traité instituant la
Communauté économique européenne.

2. La présente convention sera ratifiée, acceptée ou approuvée
par les États signataires. Les instruments de ratification,
dacceptation ou dapprobation seront déposés auprès du
secrétariat général du Conseil des Communautés européennes.

Article 29

1. La présente convention entrera en vigueur le premier jour du
troisième mois suivant le dépôt du septième instrument de
ratification, dacceptation ou dapprobation.

2. La convention entrera en vigueur pour chaque État signataire
ratifiant, acceptant ou approuvant postérieurement, le premier
jour du troisième mois suivant le dépot de son instrument de
ratification, d'acceptation ou d'approbation.

Article 30

1. La convention aura une durée de dix ans à partir de la date
de son entrée en vigueur conformément à l'article 29 paragraphe
1, même pour les États pour qui elle entrerait en vigueur
postérieurement.

2. La convention sera renouvelée tacitement de cinq ans en cinq
ans sauf dénonciation.

3. La dénonciation sera notifiée, au moins six mois avant
l'expiration du délai de dix ans ou de cinq ans selon le cas,
au secrétaire général du Conseil des Communautés européennes.

4. La dénonciation n'aura d'effet qu'à l'égard de l'État qui
l'aura notifiée. La convention restera en vigueur pour les
autres États contractants.

Article 31

Le secrétaire géneral du Conseil des Communautés européennes
notifiera aux États parties au traité instituant la Communauté
économique européenne:

a) les signatures;

b) le dépôt de tout instrument de ratification, d'acceptation
ou d'approbation;

c) la date d'entrée en vigueur de la présente convention;

d) les communications faites en application des articles 23,
24, 25, 26 et 30;

e) les réserves et le retrait des réserves mentionnées à
l'article 22.

Article 32

Le protocole annexé à la présente convention en fait partie
intégrante.

Article 33

La présente convention, rédigée en un exemplaire unique en
langues allemande, anglaise, danoise, française, irlandaise,
italienne et néerlandaise, ces textes faisant également foi,
sera déposée dans les archives du secrétariat général du
Conseil des Communautés européennes. Le secrétaire géneral en
remettra une copie certifiée conforme à chacun des
gouvernements des États signataires.

PROTOCOLE

Nonobstant les dispositions de la convention, le Danemark, la
Suède et la Finlande peuvent conserver les dispositions
nationales concernant la loi applicable aux questions relatives
au transport de marchandises par mer et peuvent modifier ces
dispositions sans suivre la procédure prévue à larticle 23 de
la convention de Rome. Les dispositions nationales applicables
en la matière sont les suivantes:

- au Danemark, les paragraphes 252 et 321 soussection 3 et 4 de
la "Sølov" (loi maritime),

- en Suède, le chapitre 13 article 2 paragraphes 1 et 2, et le
chapitre 14 article 1er paragraphe 3 de "sjölagen" (loi
maritime),

- en Finlande, le chapitre 13 article 2 paragraphes 1 et 2, et
le chapitre 14 article 1er point 3 de "merilaki"/"sjölagen"
(loi maritime).«

DÉCLARATION COMMUNE

Au moment de procéder à la signature de la convention sur la
loi applicable aux obligations contractuelles, les
gouvernements du royaume de Belgique, du royaume de Danemark,
de la république fédérale d'Allemagne, de la République
française, de l'Irlande, de la République italienne, du grand-
duché de Luxembourg, du royaume des Pays-Bàs et du Royaume-Uni
de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord,

I. soucieux d'éviter dans toute la mesure du possible la
dispersion des règles de conflit de lois entre de multiples
instruments et les divergences entre ces règles, souhaitent que
les institutions des Communautés européennes, dans l'exercice
de leurs compétences sur la base des traités qui les ont
instituées, s'efforcent, lorsqu'il y a lieu, d'adopter des
règles de conflit qui, autant que possible, soient en harmonie
avec celles de la convention;

II. déclarent leur intention de procéder, dès la signature de
la convention et en attendant d'être liés par l'article 24 de
la convention, à des consultations réciproques dans le cas où
l'un des États signataires désirerait devenir partie à une
convention à laquelle s'appliqueait la procédure prévue audit
article;

III. considérant la contribution de la convention sur la loi
applicable aux obligations contractuelles à l'unification des
règles de conflits au sein des Communautés européennes,
expriment l'opinion que tout État qui deviendrait membre des
Communautés européennes devrait adhérer à cette convention.

DÉCLARATION COMMUNE

Les gouvernements du royaume de Belgique, du royaume de
Danemark, de la république fédérale d'Allemagne, de la
République française, de l'Irlande, de la République italienne,
du grandduché de Luxembourg, du royaume des Pays-Bas et du
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord,

au moment de la signature de la convention sur la loi
applicable aux obligations contractuelles,

désirant assurer une application aussi efficace que possible de
ses dispositions,

soucieux d'éviter que les divergences d'interprétation de la
convention ne nuisent à son caractère unitaire,

se déclarent prêts:

1. à examiner la possibilité d'attribuer certaines compétences
à la Cour de justice des Communautés européennes, et à
négocier, le cas échéant, un accord à cet effet;

2. à instituer des contracts périodiques entre leurs
représentants.


KONVENTION OM TILLÄMPLIG LAG FÖR AVTALSFÖRPLIKTELSER

öppnad för undertecknande i Rom den 19 juni 1980 (80/934/EEG)

INGRESS
DE HÖGA FÖRDRAGSSLUTANDE PARTERNA i Fördraget om upprättandet
av Europeiska ekonomiska gemenskapen,

SOM ÄR ANGELÄGNA om att på den internationella privaträttens
område fullfölja det lagharmoniseringsarbete som redan har
påbörjats inom gemenskapen, särskilt när det gäller domstols
behörighet och verkställighet av domar,

SOM ÖNSKAR skapa enhetliga regler om tillämplig lag för
avtalsförpliktelser,

HAR KOMMIT ÖVERENS OM FÖLJANDE.

AVDELNING I

KONVENTIONENS TILLÄMPNINGSOMRÅDE

Artikel 1

Konventionens tillämpningsområde

1. Bestämmelserna i denna konvention skall tillämpas på
avtalsförpliktelser i de fall då ett val skall göras mellan
lagarna i olika länder.

2. De tillämpas inte på

a) frågor som rör fysiska

Bilaga 1

personers rättsliga status, rättskapacitet eller
rättshandlingsförmåga, om inte annat följer av artikel 11,

b) avtalsförpliktelser som rör

- arv och testamente,

- makars förmögenhetsförhållanden,

- rättigheter och förpliktelser som har sin grund i
familjeförhållanden, släktskap, äktenskap eller svågerskap,
inklusive underhållsskyldighet mot barn födda utom äktenskap,

c) förpliktelser som följer av växlar, checkar, löpande
skuldebrev och andra negotiabla värdepapper, i den utsträckning
som förpliktelserna enligt sådana andra värdepapper följer av
deras negotiabla karaktär,

d) skiljedomsavtal och avtal om val av domstol,

e) frågor som omfattas av reglerna om bolag, föreningar och
andra juridiska personer, såsom frågor om deras upprättande
genom registrering eller på annat sätt, deras rättskapacitet,
interna organisation eller upplösning samt om personligt ansvar
för delägare eller medlemmar och organ i denna egenskap för
bolagets, föreningens eller den juridiska personens
förpliktelser,

f) frågan om en mellanman kan binda sin huvudman i förhållande
till tredje man, eller om ett organ för ett bolag, en förening
eller en annan juridisk person kan binda bolaget, föreningen
eller den juridiska personen i förhållande till tredje man,

g) bildande av "truster" och förhållandet mellan instiftare,
"trustees" och förmånstagare,

h) bevisfrågor och processuella frågor, om inte annat följer av
artikel 14.

3. Reglerna i denna konvention tillämpas inte på
försäkringsavtal som täcker risker belägna inom Europeiska
ekonomiska gemenskapens medlemsstaters territorium. För att
avgöra om en risk är belägen inom dessa områden skall domstolen
tillämpa inhemsk rätt.

4. Punkt 3 tillämpas inte på återförsäkringsavtal.

Artikel 2

Tillämpning av lagen i en icke fördragsslutande stat

Den lag som anvisas i denna konvention skall tillämpas även om
det är lagen i en icke fördragsslutande stat.

AVDELNING II

ENHETLIGA REGLER

Artikel 3

Lagval genom avtal

1. På ett avtal tillämpas den lag som parterna har valt.
Lagvalet måste vara uttryckligt eller med rimlig säkerhet
framgå av avtalsvillkoren eller av övriga omständigheter. Genom
sitt val kan parterna ange tillämplig lag för hela avtalet
eller för endast en del av det.

2. Parterna kan när som helst komma överens om att en annan lag
skall vara tillämplig på avtalet än den lag som tidigare gällde
för det antingen till följd av ett tidigare val enligt denna
artikel eller till följd av andra bestämmelser i denna
konvention. En ändring i valet av tillämplig lag som görs av
parterna efter avtalsslutet påverkar inte avtalets giltighet
till formen enligt artikel 9. Det försämrar inte heller tredje
mans rättigheter.

3. Den omständigheten att parterna har valt en utländsk lag
skall, oavsett om de också har avtalat om behörighet för en
utländsk domstol eller inte, när alla andra omständigheter av
betydelse vid tidpunkten för valet har anknytning till ett enda
land, inte hindra tillämpningen av sådana regler i det landet
som inte kan avtalas bort, härefter benämnda "tvingande
regler".

4. Frågor om förekomsten och giltigheten av parternas samtycke
till att en viss lag skall vara tillämplig avgörs enligt
bestämmelserna i artiklarna 8, 9 och 11.

Artikel 4

Tillämplig lag i avsaknad av parternas lagval

1. I den utsträckning tillämplig lag för avtalet inte har valts
i enlighet med artikel 3 skall avtalet vara underkastat lagen i
det land som det har närmast anknytning till. Om en del av
avtalet kan skiljas från resten av avtalet och denna del har
närmare anknytning till ett annat land, kan dock lagen i det
landet undantagsvis tillämpas på denna del.

2. Med förbehåll för vad som föreskrivs i punkt 5 skall det
antas att avtalet har närmast anknytning till det land där den
part som skall utföra den prestation som är karaktäristisk för
avtalet har sin vanliga vistelseort vid avtalsslutet eller, om
det gäller ett bolag, en förening eller en annan juridisk
person, sin centrala förvaltning. Om avtalet ingås som ett led
i denna parts affärsverksamhet eller yrkesverksamhet, skall
detta land dock vara det land där det huvudsakliga
verksamhetsstället är beläget eller, om enligt avtalet
prestationen skall fullgöras från ett annat verksamhetsställe,
det land där det andra verksamhetsstället är beläget.

3. Oavsett bestämmelserna i punkt 2 skall det, i den mån
avtalet gäller en sakrätt i fast egendom eller en nyttjanderätt
till fast egendom, antas att avtalet har närmast anknytning
till det land där den fasta egendomen är belägen.

4. För avtal om godstransport gäller inte antagandet i punkt 2.
Sådana avtal skall antas ha närmast anknytning till det land
där transportören vid den tidpunkt då avtalet ingicks hade sitt
huvudsakliga verksamhetsställe, om det landet också är det land
där platsen för lastning eller lossning finns eller där
avsändaren har sitt huvudsakliga verksamhetsställe. Vid
tillämpning av denna punkt skall certepartier för en enstaka
resa och andra avtal vilkas huvudsyfte är transport av gods
anses som avtal om godstransport.

5. Punkt 2 skall inte tillämpas om det inte kan avgöras vilken
den karaktäristiska prestationen är. Antagandena i punkterna 2-
4 skall inte gälla, om det framgår av de samlade
omständigheterna att avtalet har närmare anknytning till ett
annat land.

Artikel 5

Konsumentavtal

1. Denna artikel är tillämplig på avtal om leverans av varor
eller utförande av tjänster åt en person (konsumenten) för
ändamål som kan anses ligga utanför hans affärsverksamhet eller
yrkesverksamhet och på avtal om kredit för sådana prestationer.

2. Oavsett bestämmelserna i artikel 3 skall parternas val av
tillämplig lag inte medföra att konsumenten berövas det skydd
som tillförsäkras honom enligt tvingande regler i lagen i det
land där han har sin vanliga vistelseort,

- om avtalet föregicks av ett särskilt anbud riktat till
konsumenten i det landet eller av annonsering där och
konsumenten där vidtog de för avtalets ingående nödvändiga
åtgärderna, eller

- om den andra parten eller dennes representant mottog
konsumentens beställning i det landet, eller

- om avtalet avser försäljning av varor och konsumenten reste
från det landet till ett annat land och gjorde sin beställning
där, förutsatt att konsumentens resa arrangerades av säljaren i
syfte att förmå konsumenten att köpa.

3. Oavsett bestämmelserna i artikel 4 skall avtal som den här
artikeln är tillämplig på, i avsaknad av lagval enligt artikel
3, vara underkastade lagen i det land där konsumenten har sin
vanliga vistelseort, om de ingås under de omständigheter som
anges i punkt 2.

4. Denna artikel skall inte tillämpas på

a) transportavtal,

b) avtal om utförande av tjänster, om tjänsterna skall utföras
uteslutande i ett annat land än det där konsumenten har sin
vanliga vistelseort.

5. Oavsett bestämmelserna i punkt 4 tillämpas denna artikel på
avtal om en kombination av resa och inkvartering för ett
gemensamt pris.

Artikel 6

Individuella anställningsavtal

1. Oavsett bestämmelserna i artikel 3 skall parternas val av
tillämplig lag i ett anställningsavtal inte medföra att den
anställde berövas det skydd som tillförsäkras honom enligt
tvingande regler i den lag som enligt punkt 2 skulle tillämpas
om inget lagval gjorts.

2. Oavsett bestämmelserna i artikel 4 skall ett anställnings-
avtal i avsaknad av lagval enligt artikel 3 vara underkastat

a) lagen i det land där den anställde vid fullgörande av
avtalet vanligtvis utför sitt arbete, även om han tillfälligt
är sysselsatt i ett annat land, eller

b) om den anställde inte vanligtvis

utför sitt arbete i ett och samma land, lagen i det land där
det verksamhetsställe genom vilket han anställdes är beläget,

om det inte av de samlade omständigheterna framgår att avtalet
har närmare anknytning till ett annat land, i vilket fall
avtalet skall vara underkastat lagen i det landet.

Artikel 7

Internationellt tvingande regler

1. När lagen i ett visst land tillämpas enligt denna konvention
kan tvingande bestämmelser i lagen i ett annat land till vilket
situationen har nära anknytning tillerkännas verkan, om och i
den utsträckning som enligt lagen i det senare landet dessa
regler skall tillämpas oavsett vilken lag som är tillämplig på
avtalet. Vid bedömningen av om sådana tvingande regler skall
tillerkännas verkan skall hänsyn tas till deras art och syfte
liksom till följderna av att de tillämpas eller inte tillämpas.

2. Denna konvention skall inte begränsa tillämpningen av regler
i domstolslandets lag när de är tvingande oavsett vilken lag
som i övrigt skall tillämpas på avtalet.

Artikel 8

Materiell giltighet

1. Förekomsten och giltigheten av ett avtal eller en
bestämmelse i ett avtal skall avgöras enligt den lag som skulle
tillämpas enligt denna konvention, om avtalet eller
bestämmelsen var giltig.

2. En part kan dock åberopa lagen i det land där han har sin
vanliga vistelseort för att få fastställt att han inte har
samtyckt till avtalet eller avtalsbestämmelsen, om det framgår
av omständigheterna att det inte skulle vara rimligt att avgöra
verkan av hans uppträdande enligt den lag som anges i
föregående punkt.

Artikel 9

Giltighet till formen

1. Ett avtal som ingås mellan personer som befinner sig i samma
land är giltigt till formen, om det uppfyller formkraven i den
lag

som gäller för avtalet enligt denna konvention eller i lagen i
det land där avtalet ingås.

2. Ett avtal som ingås mellan personer som befinner sig i olika
länder är giltigt till formen, om det uppfyller formkraven i
den lag

som gäller för avtalet enligt denna konvention eller i lagen i
något av dessa länder.

3. När ett avtal ingås av en representant är det land där
representanten handlar det relevanta landet vid tillämpningen
av punkterna 1

och 2.

4. En ensidig rättshandling som avser ett existerande eller ett
framtida avtal är giltig till formen, om den uppfyller
formkraven i den lag som enligt denna konvention gäller för
eller skulle gälla för avtalet eller i lagen i det land där
rättshandlingen företogs.

5. Bestämmelserna i de föregående punkterna skall inte
tillämpas

på avtal som omfattas av artikel 5 och som har ingåtts under de
omständigheter som anges i artikel 5.2. Giltigheten till formen
av sådana avtal avgörs enligt lagen i det land där konsumenten
har sin vanliga vistelseort.

6. Oavsett punkterna 1-4 i denna artikel skall ett avtal som
avser sakrätt i fast egendom eller nyttjanderätt till fast
egendom vara underkastat sådana tvingande formkrav som ställs
enligt lagen i det land där egendomen är belägen, om sådana
krav ställs enligt den lagen oavsett i vilket land avtalet har
ingåtts och oavsett vilken lag som gäller för avtalet.

Artikel 10

Den tillämpliga lagens räckvidd

1. Den lag som är tillämplig på avtalet enligt artiklarna 3-6
och 12 i denna konvention skall reglera särskilt

a) avtalets tolkning,

b) dess fullgörelse,

c) följderna vid avtalsbrott, däribland uppskattning av skada i
den mån sådan uppskattning regleras av rättsregler, dock endast
inom ramen för de befogenheter som tillkommer domstolen enligt
dess processuella regler,

d) olika sätt att få förpliktelserna att upphöra, samt
preskription och andra rättighetsförluster som följer av
utgången av en frist,

e) följderna av avtalets ogiltighet.

2. När det gäller sättet för fullgörelse och åtgärder med
anledning av bristande fullgörelse skall hänsyn tas till lagen
i det land där fullgörelsen äger rum.

Artikel 11

Bristande rättskapacitet och bristande rättslig
handlingsförmåga

När ett avtal har ingåtts mellan personer som befinner sig i
samma land, kan en fysisk person som har rättskapacitet och
rättshandlingsförmåga enligt lagen i det landet åberopa
bristande rättskapacitet och bristande rättshandlingsförmåga
enligt en annan lag, endast om den andra avtalsparten när
avtalet ingicks kände till eller borde ha känt till denna
brist.

Artikel 12

Överlåtelse av fordran

1. Överlåtarens och förvärvarens inbördes förpliktelser vid
överlåtelse av en fordran skall bestämmas enligt den lag som
enligt denna konvention är tillämplig på avtalet mellan
överlåtaren och förvärvaren.

2. Den lag som är tillämplig på den överlåtna fordringen skall
reglera dess överlåtbarhet, förhållandet mellan förvärvaren och
gäldenären, de förutsättningar under vilka överlåtelsen kan
göras gällande mot gäldenären och frågan om en prestation av
gäldenären befriar honom från hans förpliktelser.

Artikel 13

Subrogation

1. När en person (borgenären) har en avtalsgrundad fordran mot
en annan person (gäldenären) och en tredje person är skyldig
att prestera till borgenären eller redan har presterat till
denne till uppfyllelse av sin skyldighet, skall frågan om den
tredje personen har rätt att mot gäldenären helt eller delvis
utöva de rättigheter som borgenären hade mot gäldenären enligt
den lag som gäller för förhållandet dem emellan avgöras enligt
den lag som gäller för den tredje personens skyldighet att
prestera till borgenären.

2. Samma regel gäller när flera personer har samma
avtalsförpliktelse och en av dem har fullgjort prestationen
till borgenären.

Artikel 14

Bevisbördan m.m.

1. Den lag som enligt denna konvention gäller för ett avtal
skall tillämpas även i den mån den för avtalsrättsliga
förhållanden uppställer rättsliga presumtioner eller fördelar
bevisbördan.

2. Bevisning om ett avtal eller en rättshandling får föras med
varje slags bevismedel som godtas enligt lagen i domstolslandet
eller enligt någon av de i artikel 9 angivna lagarna enligt
vilka avtalet eller rättshandlingen har giltighet till formen,
förutsatt att sådan bevisföring kan genomföras vid domstolen.

Artikel 15

Renvoi är utesluten

När konventionen föreskriver att lagen i ett visst land skall
tillämpas avses gällande rättsregler i det landet, med undantag
för landets internationellt privaträttsliga regler.

Artikel 16

Ordre public

Tillämpning av en regel i den lag som anvisas i denna
konvention får vägras endast om en sådan tillämpning är
uppenbart oförenlig med grunderna för domstolslandets
rättsordning.

Artikel 17

Tillämplighet i tiden

Denna konvention skall tillämpas i en konventionsstat på avtal
som ingås efter den dag då konventionen har trätt i kraft i
förhållande till den staten.

Artikel 18

Enhetlig tolkning

Vid tolkning och tillämpning av ovanstående enhetliga regler
skall hänsyn tas till deras internationella karaktär och till
önskemålet att det uppnås enhetlighet vid deras tolkning och
tillämpning.

Artikel 19

Stater med mer än en rättsordning

1. När en stat omfattar flera territoriella enheter som var och
en har sina egna rättsregler i fråga om avtalsförpliktelser
skall varje sådan enhet anses som ett land vid fastställandet
av den lag som skall tillämpas enligt denna konvention.

2. En stat där olika territoriella enheter har sina egna
rättsregler för avtalsförpliktelser behöver inte tillämpa denna
konvention vid lagkonflikter enbart mellan lagarna i sådana
enheter.

Artikel 20

Gemenskapsrättens företräde

Denna konvention skall inte inverka på tillämpningen av
bestämmelser som på särskilda områden fastställer lagvalsregler
för avtalsförpliktelser och som ingår i eller kommer att ingå i
rättsakter utfärdade av Europeiska gemenskapernas institutioner
eller i nationella lagar som harmoniserats för genomförande av
sådana rättsakter.

Artikel 21

Förhållandet till andra konventioner

Denna konvention skall inte inverka på tillämpningen av
internationella konventioner som en konventionsstat har
tillträtt eller kommer att tillträda.

Artikel 22

Reservationer

1. Varje konventionsstat får vid tidpunkten för undertecknande,
ratifikation, antagande eller godkännande förbehålla sig rätten
att inte tillämpa

a) artikel 7.1,

b) artikel 10.1 e.

2. [Upphävd]

3. Varje konventionsstat får när som helst återkalla en
reservation som den har gjort; reservationen skall upphöra att
gälla den första

dagen i den tredje kalendermånaden efter anmälan om
återkallelsen.

AVDELNING III

SLUTBESTÄMMELSER

Artikel 23

1. Om en konventionsstat efter det att konventionen har trätt i
kraft för den staten önskar anta en ny lagvalsregel för en viss
typ av avtal som omfattas av denna konvention, skall den
meddela sin avsikt till de övriga signatärstaterna genom
generalsekreteraren vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd.

2. Varje signatärstat får inom sex månader från den dag då
generalsekreteraren underrättades, begära att denne inleder
överläggningar mellan signatärstaterna för att nå en
överenskommelse.

3. Om ingen signatärstat har begärt överläggningar inom denna
period eller om under överläggningarna ingen överenskommelse
har nåtts inom två år från det att generalsekreteraren
underrättades, får den berörda konventionsstaten ändra sin lag
på angivet sätt. De åtgärder som vidtas av denna stat skall
meddelas övriga signatärstater genom generalsekreteraren vid
Europeiska gemenskapernas råd.

Artikel 24

1. Om en konventionsstat efter det att denna konvention har
trätt i kraft för den staten önskar tillträda en multilateral
konvention som har som huvudsakligt mål eller som ett av sina
huvudsakliga mål att fastställa internationellt privaträttsliga
regler för frågor som omfattas av denna konvention, skall
förfarandet i artikel 23 tillämpas. Den period om två år som
avses i artikel 23.3 skall dock minskas till ett år.

2. Det förfarande som avses i punkt 1 behöver inte följas om en
konventionsstat eller någon av Europeiska gemenskaperna redan
har tillträtt den multilaterala konventionen eller om dess
syfte är att revidera en konvention som den berörda staten
redan har tillträtt eller om det är en konvention som har
ingåtts inom ramen för fördragen om upprättandet av Europeiska
gemenskaperna.

Artikel 25

Om en konventionsstat anser att den harmonisering som uppnås
genom denna konvention äventyras av överenskommelser som inte
omfattas av artikel 24.1, får den staten begära att
generalsekreteraren vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd inleder
överläggningar mellan signatärstaterna till denna konvention.

Artikel 26

Varje konventionsstat får begära att denna konvention
revideras. I så fall skall ordföranden för Europeiska
gemenskapernas råd sammankalla en revisionskonferens.

Artikel 27

[Upphävd]

Artikel 28

1. Denna konvention skall från den 19 juni 1980 vara öppen för
undertecknande av de stater som är parter i Fördraget om
upprättandet av Europeiska ekonomiska gemenskapen.

2. Denna konvention skall ratificeras, godtas eller godkännas
av signatärstaterna. Ratifikations-, godtagande- eller
godkännandeinstrumenten skall deponeras hos generalsekreteraren
vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd.

Artikel 29

1. Denna konvention träder i kraft den första dagen i den
tredje kalendermånaden efter det att det sjunde ratifikations-,
godtagande- eller godkännandeinstrumentet har deponerats.

2. Denna konvention träder i kraft för varje signatärstat som
därefter ratificerar, godtar eller godkänner konventionen den
första dagen i den tredje kalendermånaden efter det att
ratifikations-, godtagande- eller godkännandeinstrument har
deponerats.

Artikel 30

1. Denna konvention gäller för en period av tio år räknat från
den dag då den träder i kraft enligt artikel 29.1, och detta
även för stater för vilka den träder i kraft vid en senare
tidpunkt.

2. Om det inte skett någon uppsägning, förlängs konventionen
automatiskt vart femte år.

3. En konventionsstat som vill säga upp konventionen skall
senast

sex månader före utgången av tio- eller femårsperioden
underrätta generalsekreteraren vid Europeiska gemenskapernas
råd om detta.

4. Uppsägningen skall ha verkan endast i förhållande till den
stat som har gjort den. Konventionen skall fortsätta att gälla
mellan övriga konventionsstater.

Artikel 31

Generalsekreteraren vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd skall
underrätta de stater som är parter i Fördraget om upprättandet
av Europeiska ekonomiska gemenskapen om

a) undertecknandena,

b) deponeringen av varje ratifikations-, godtagande- eller
godkännandeinstrument,

c) dagen för konventionens ikraftträdande,

d) underrättelser som lämnas enligt artiklarna 23, 24, 25, 26
och 30,

e) reservationer och återkallelser av reservationer som avses i
artikel 22.

Artikel 32

Det protokoll som biläggs denna konvention utgör en integrerad
del av konventionen.

Artikel 33

Denna konvention, upprättad i ett enda exemplar på danska,
engelska, franska, iriska, italienska, nederländska och tyska
språken, vilka texter alla äger lika giltighet, skall deponeras
i arkiven hos generalsekretariatet vid Europeiska
gemenskapernas råd. Generalsekreteraren skall överlämna en
bestyrkt kopia till regeringen i varje signatärstat.

PROTOKOLL

Utan hinder av bestämmelserna i konventionen får Danmark,
Sverige och Finland behålla sina nationella bestämmelser om
tillämplig lag när det gäller sjötransport av gods och får
ändra dessa bestämmelser utan att förfarandet i artikel 23 i
Romkonventionen följs. De tillämpliga nationella bestämmelserna
är följande:

- I Danmark 252 § och 321 § tredje och fjärde stycket i Søloven
(sjölagen).

- I Sverige 13 kap. 2 § första och andra stycket samt 14 kap.
1 § tredje stycket sjölagen.

- I Finland 13 kap. 2 § 1 och 2 mom. och 14 kap. 1 § 3 mom. i
merilaki (sjölagen).

GEMENSAM FÖRKLARING

Vid undertecknandet av konventionen om tillämplig lag för
avtalsförpliktelser förklarar regeringarna i Konungariket
Belgien, Konungariket Danmark, Förbundsrepubliken Tyskland,
Franska republiken, Irland, Italienska republiken,
Storhertigdömet Luxemburg, Konungariket Nederländerna och
Förenade konungariket Storbritannien och Nordirland följande:

I. Angelägna om att så långt det är möjligt undvika spridning
av lagvalsregler mellan flera olika instrument och skillnader
mellan dessa regler, uttrycker de sin önskan om att Europeiska
gemenskapernas institutioner vid utövandet av sina befogenheter
enligt de fördrag genom vilka de upprättades, vid behov kommer
att sträva efter att anta lagvalsregler som så långt det är
möjligt är förenliga med reglerna i denna konvention.

II. De förklarar att de från dagen för undertecknandet av denna
konvention tills de blir bundna av artikel 24 har för avsikt
att samråda inbördes, om någon av signatärstaterna önskar
tillträda någon konvention som förfarandet enligt

artikel 24 skulle bli tillämpligt på.

III. Med beaktande av att konventionen om tillämplig lag för
avtalsförpliktelser bidrar till att skapa ökad enhetlighet i
fråga om lagvalsregler inom Europeiska gemenskaperna, uttrycker
de ståndpunkten att varje stat som blir medlem av Europeiska
gemenskaperna bör ansluta sig till denna konvention.

GEMENSAM FÖRKLARING

Regeringarna i Konungariket Belgien, Konungariket Danmark,
Förbundsrepubliken Tyskland, Franska republiken, Irland,
Italienska republiken, Storhertigdömet Luxemburg, Konungariket
Nederländerna och Förenade konungariket Storbritannien och
Nordirland,

som vid undertecknandet av konventionen om tillämplig lag för
avtalsförpliktelser,

önskar säkerställa att denna konvention tillämpas så effektivt
som möjligt, och

som är angelägna om att förhindra att skillnader beträffande
tolkningen av denna konvention motverkar dess
enhetlighetsskapande effekt,

förklarar sig beredda att

1. undersöka möjligheten att göra Europeiska gemenskapernas
domstol behörig och, om det visar sig nödvändigt, att förhandla
fram ett avtal för detta ändamål, samt

2. anordna regelbundna möten mellan sina företrädare.


FIRST PROTOCOL ON THE INTERPRETATION BY THE COURT OF JUSTICE OF
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES OF THE CONVENTION ON THE LAW
APPLICABLE TO CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS

opened for signature in Rome on 19 June 1980 (89/128/EEC).

THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES TO THE TREATY ESTABLISHING THE
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY,

HAVING REGARD to the joint declaration annexed to the
convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations,
opened for signature in rome on 19 June 1980,

HAVE DECIDED to conclude a protocol conferring jurisdiction on
the Court of Justice of the European Communities to interpret
that Convention, and to this end have designated as their
Plenipotentaries:

------------------------------

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

Article 1

The Court of Justice of the European Communities shall have
jurisdiction to give rulings on the interpretation of:

a) the Convention on the law applicable to contractual
obligations, opened for signature in Rome on 19 June 1980,
here-inafter referred to as the Rome Convention;

b) the Convention on accession to the Rome Convention by the
states which have become members of the European Communities
since the date on which it was opened for signature;

c) this Protocol.

Article 2

Any of the courts referred to below may request the Court of
Justice to give a preliminary ruling on a question raised in a
case pending before it and concerning interpretation of the
provisions contained in the instruments referred to in Article
1 if that court considers that a decision on the question is
necessary to enable it to give judgment:

a) - in Belgium:

la Cour de Cassation (Het Hof van Cassatie) and le Conseil
d´etat (de Raad van State)

- in Denmark:

Højesteret,

- in the Federal Republic of Germany:

die Obersten Gerichtshöfe des Bundes,

- in Greece:

ta Anotata Aikastiria,

- in Spain

el Tribunal Supremo,

- in France:

la Cour de Cassation and le Conseil dEtat,

- in Ireland:

the Supreme Court,

- in Italy:

la Corte Suprema di Cassazione and il Consiglio di Stato,

- in Luxembourg:

la Cour Supérieure de Justice, when sitting as Cour de
Cassation,

- in The Netherlands:

de Hoge Raad,

- in Austria:

the Oberste Gerichtshof, the Verwaltungsgerichtshof and the
Verfassungsgerichtshof,

- in Portugal:

o Supremo Tribunal de Justiça and o Supremo Tribunal
Administrativo,

- in Finland:

korkein oikeus/Högsta domstolen, korkein hallinto-oikeus/Högsta
förvaltningsdomstolen, markkina-tuomioistuin/Marknadsdomstolen
and työtuomioistuin/Arbetsdomstolen,

- in Sweden:

Högsta domstolen, Regeringsrätten, Arbetsdomstolen and
Marknadsdomstolen,

- in the United Kingdom:

the House of Lords and other courts from which no further
appeal is possible;

b) the courts of the Contracting States when acting as appeal
courts.

Article 3

1. The competent authority of a Contracting State may request
the Court of Justice to give a ruling on a question of
interpretation of the provisions contained in the instruments
referred to in Article 1 if judgments given by the courts of
that State conflict with the interpretation given either by the
Court of Justice or in a judgment of one of the courts of
another Contracting State referred to in Article 2. The
provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to judgments
which have become res judicata.

2. The interpretation given by the Court of Justice in response
to such a request shall not affect the judgments which gave
rise to the request for interpretation.

3. The Procurators-General of the Supreme Courts of Appeal of
the Contracting States, or any other authority designated by a
Contracting State, shall be entitled to request the Court of
Justice for a ruling on interpretation in accordance with
paragraph 1.

4. The registrar of the Court of Justice shall give notice of
the request to the Contracting States, to the Commission and to
the Council of the European Communities; they shall then be
entitled within two months of the notifiation to submit
statements of case or written observations to the court.

5. No fees shall be levied or any costs or expenses awarded in
respect of the proceedings provided for in this article.

Article 4

1. Except where this Protocol otherwise provides, the
provisions of the Treaty establishing the European Community
and those of the Protocol on the statute of the Court of
Justice annexed thereto, which are applicable when the Court is
requested to give a preliminary ruling, shall also apply to any
proceedings for the interpretation of the instruments referred
to in Article 1.

2. The rules of procedure of the Court of Justice shall, if
necessary, be adjusted and supplemented in accordance with
article 188 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic
Community.

Article 5

This Protocol shall be subject to ratification by the Signatory
States. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities.

Article 6

1. To enter into force, this Protocol must be ratified by seven
states in respect of which the Rome Convention is in force.
This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the
third month following the deposit of the instrument of
ratification by the last such State to take this step. If,
however, the Second Protocol conferring on the Court of Justice
of the European Communities certain powers to interpret the
Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations,
opened for signature in Rome on 19 June 1980, concluded in
Brussels on 19 December 1988, enters into force on a later
date, this protocol shall enter into force on the date of entry
into force of the Second Protocol.

2. Any ratification subsequent to the entry into force of this
Protocol shall take effect on the first day of the third month
following the deposit of the instrument of ratification,
provided that the ratification, acceptance or approval of the
Rome Convention by the State in question has become effective.

Article 7

The Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities shall notify the Signatory States of:

a) the deposit of each instrument of ratification;

b) the date of entry into force of this Protocol;

c) any designation communicated pursuant to article 3 (3);

d) any communication made pursuant to Article 8.

Article 8

The Contracting States shall communicate to the Secretary-
General of the Council of the European Communities the texts of
any provisions of their laws which necessitate an amendment to
the list of courts in Article 2 (a).

Article 9

This Protocol shall have effect for as long as the Rome
Convention remains in force under the conditions laid down in
Article 30 of that Convention.

Article 10

Any Contracting State may request the revision of this
Protocol. In this event, a revision conference shall be
convened by the President of the Council of the European
Communities.

Article 11

This Protocol, drawn up in a single original in the Danish,
Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Irish, Italian,
Portuguese and Spanish languages, all 10 texts being equally
authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the General
Secretariat of the Council of the European Communities. The
Secretary-General shall transmit a certified copy to the
government of each Signatory State.

In witness whereof, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have
affixed their signatures below this Protocol.

Done at Brussels on the nineteenth day of December in the year
one thousand nine hundred and eighty-eight.


PREMIER PROTOCOLE CONCERNANT L'INTERPRÉTATION PAR LA COUR DE
JUSTICE DES COMMUNAUTÉS EUROPÉENNES DE LA CONVENTION SUR LA LOI
APPLICABLE AUX OBLIGATIONS CONTRACTUELLES,

ouverte à la signature à Rome le 19 juin 1980

LES HAUTES PARTIES CONTRACTANTES AU TRAITÉ INSTITUANT LA
COMMUNAUTÉ ÉCONOMIQUE EUROPÉENNE,

SE RÉFÉRANT à la déclaration commune annexée à la convention
sur la loi applicable aux obligations contractuelles, ouverte à
la signature à rome le 19 juin 1980,

ONT DÉCIDÉ de conclure un protocole attribuant compétence à la
cour de justice des communautés européennes pour
l'interprétation de ladite convention et ont désigné à cet
effet comme plénipotentiaires:

--------------------------------

SONT CONVENUS DES DISPOSITIONS QUI SUIVENT:

Article premier

La Cour de justice des Communautés européennes est compétente
pour statuer sur l'interprétation:

a) de la convention sur la loi applicable aux obligations
contractuelles, ouverte à la signature à Rome le 19 juin 1980,
ciaprès dénommée «convention de

Rome»;

b) des conventions relatives à l'adhésion à la convention de
Rome des États qui sont devenus membres des Communautés
européennes après la date de son ouverture à la signature;

c) du présent protocole.

Article 2

Toute juridiction visée ciaprès a la faculté de demander à la
Cour de justice de statuer à titre préjudiciel sur une question
soulevée dans une affaire pendante devant elle et portant sur
l'interprétation des dispositions que comportent les
instruments mentionnés à l'article 1er, lorsqu'elle estime
qu'une décision sur ce point est nécessaire pour rendre son
jugement:

a) - en Belgique:

la Cour de cassation (het Hof van Cassatie) et le Conseil
d´Etat (de Raad van State),

- au Danemark:

Højesteret,

- en république fédérale d'Allemagne:

die Obersten Gerichtshöfe des Bundes,

- en Grèce:

ta Anotata Aikastiria,

- en Espagne:

el Tribunal Supremo,

- en France:

la Cour de cassation et le Conseil d'État,

- en Irlande:

the Supreme Court,

- en Italie:

la Corte suprema di cassazione et il Consiglio di Stato,

- au Luxembourg:

la Cour supérieure de justice siégeant comme Cour de cassation,

- aux Pays-Bas:

de Hoge Raad,

- en Autriche:

le Oberste Gerichtshof, le Verwaltungsgerichtshof et le
Verfassungsgerichtshof,

- au Portugal:

o Supremo Tribunal de Justiça et o Supremo Tribunal
Administrativo,

- en Finlande:

korkein oikeus/Högsta domstolen, korkein hallinto-oikeus/Högsta
förvaltningsdomstolen, markkina-tuomioistuin/Marknadsdomstolen
et työtuomioistuin/Arbetsdomstolen,

- en Suède:

Högsta domstolen, Regeringsrätten, Arbetsdomstolen et
Marknadsdomstolen,

- au Royaume-Uni:

the House of Lords et les autres juridictions dont les
décisions ne sont plus susceptibles de recours;

b) les juridictions des États contractants lorsqu'elles
statuent en appel.

Article 3

1. L'autorité compétente d'un État contractant a la faculté de
demander à la Cour de justice de se prononcer sur une question
d'interprétation des dispositions que comportent les
instruments mentionnés à l'article ler si des décisions rendues
par des juridictions de cet État sont en contradiction avec
l'interprétation donnée soit par la Cour de justice, soit par
une décision d'une juridiction d'un autre État contractant
mentionnée à l'article 2. Les dispositions du présent
paragraphe ne s'appliquent qu'aux décisions passées en force de
chose jugée.

2. L'interprétation donnée par le Cour de justice à la suite
d'une telle demande est sans effet sur les décisions à
l'occasion desquelles l'interprétation lui a été demandée.

3. Sont compétents pour saisir la Cour de justice d'une demande
d'interprétation conformément au paragraphe 1 les procureurs
généraux près les cours de cassation des États contractants ou
toute autre autorité désignée par un État contractant.

4. Le greffier de la Cour de justice notifie la demande aux
États contractants, à la Commission et au Conseil des
Communautés européennes, qui, dans un délai de deux mois à
compter de cette notification, ont le droit de déposer devant
la Cour des mémoires ou observations écrites.

5. La procédure prévue au présent article ne donne lieu ni à la
perception ni au remboursement des frais et dépens.

Article 4

1. Dans la mesure où le présent protocole n'en dispose pas
autrement, les dispositions du traité instituant la Communauté
économique européenne et celles du protocole sur le statut de
la Cour de justice y annexé qui sont applicables lorsque la
Cour est appelée à statuer à titre préjudiciel s'appliquent
également à la procédure d'interprétation des instruments
mentionnés à l'article 1er.

2. Le règlement de procédure de la Cour de justice est adapté
et complété, si besoin est, conformément à l'article 188 du
traité instituant la Communauté économique européenne.

Article 5

Le présent protocole est soumis à la ratification des États
signataires. Les instruments de ratification sont déposés
auprès du secrétaire général du Conseil des Communautés
européennes.

Article 6

1. Pour entrer en vigueur, le présent protocole doit être
ratifié par sept États à l'égard desquels la convention de Rome
est en vigueur. Il entre en vigueur le premier jour du
troisième mois suivant le dépôt de l'instrument de ratification
par celui de ces États qui procède le dernier à cette
formalité. Toutefois, si le deuxième protocole attribuant à la
Cour de justice des Communautés européennes certaines

compétences en matière d'interprétation de la convention sur la
loi applicable aux obligations contractuelles ouverte à la
signature

à Rome le 19 juin 1980, conclu à Bruxelles le 19 décembre 1988,
entre en vigueur à une date ultérieure, le présent protocole
entre également en vigueur à la date d'entrée en vigueur du
deuxième protocole.

2. Toute ratification postérieure à l'entrée en vigueur du
présent protocole prend effet le premier jour du troisième mois
suivant le dépôt de l'instrument de ratification, pour autant
que la ratification, l'acceptation ou l'approbation de la
convention de Rome par l'État en question soit devenue
effective.

Article 7

Le secrétaire général du Conseil des Communautés européennes
notifie aux États signataires:

a) le dépôt de tout instrument de ratification;

b) la date d'entrée en vigueur du présent protocole;

c) les désignations communiquées en application de l'article 3
paragraphe 3;

d) les communications effectuées en application de l'article 8.

Article 8

Les États contractants communiquent au secrétaire général du
Conseil des Communautés européennes les textes de leurs
dispositions législatives qui impliquent une modification de la
liste des juridictions désignées à l'article 2 point a).

Article 9

Le présent protocole produit ses effets aussi longtemps que la
convention de Rome reste en vigueur dans les conditions prévues
à son article 30.

Article 10

Chaque État contractant peut demander la révision du présent
protocole. Dans ce cas, une conférence de révision est
convoquée par le président du Conseil des Communautés
européennes.

Article 11

Le présent protocole, rédigé en un exemplaire unique en langues
allemande, anglaise, danoise, espagnole, française, grecque,
irlandaise, italienne, néerlandaise et portugaise, les dix
textes faisant également foi, est déposé dans les archives du
secrétariat général du Conseil des Communautés européennes. Le
secrétaire général en remet une copie certifiée conforme à
chacun des gouvernements des États signataires.

En foi de quoi, les plénipotentiaires ont apposé leur signature
au bas du présent protocole.

Fait à Bruxelles, les dix-neuf décembre mil neuf cent quatre-
vingt-huit.


FÖRSTA PROTOKOLLET OM EUROPEISKA GEMENSKAPERNAS DOMSTOLS
TOLKNING AV KONVENTIONEN OM TILLÄMPLIG LAG FÖR
AVTALSFÖRPLIKTELSER

öppnad för undertecknande i Rom den 19 juni 1980

DE HÖGA FÖRDRAGSSLUTANDE PARTERNA I FÖRDRAGET OM UPPRÄTTANDET
AV EUROPEISKA EKONOMISKA GEMENSKAPEN,

SOM HÄNVISAR till den gemensamma förklaring som har bilagts
konventionen om tillämplig lag för avtalsförpliktelser, öppnad
för undertecknande i Rom den 19 juni 1980,

HAR BESLUTAT att anta ett protokoll som tilldelar Europeiska
gemenskapernas domstol behörighet att tolka den konventionen
och har för detta ändamål som befullmäktigade ombud utsett.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

HAR ENATS OM FÖLJANDE BESTÄMMELSER.

Artikel 1

Europeiska gemenskapernas domstol är behörig att tolka

a) konventionen om tillämplig lag för avtalsförpliktelser,
öppnad för undertecknande i Rom den 19 juni 1980, nedan kallad
"Romkonventionen",

b) konventioner om anslutning till Romkonventionen av stater
som blir medlemmar av Europeiska gemenskapen efter det att
konventionen öppnades för undertecknande,

c) detta protokoll.

Artikel 2

Följande domstolar har rätt att begära att domstolen skall
meddela förhandsavgörande i en fråga som uppkommer i ett mål
som är anhängigt vid dem och rör tolkningen av bestämmelserna i
de instrument som nämns i artikel 1, när de anser att ett
beslut i frågan är nödvändigt för att de skall kunna döma i
saken:

a) - i Belgien:

la Cour de cassation - het Hof van Cassatie och le Conseil
dEtat - de Raad van State,

- i Danmark:

Højesteret,

- i Förbundsrepubliken Tyskland:

die obersten Gerichtshöfe des

Bundes,

- i Grekland:

ta anwtata dicasthria,

- i Spanien:

el Tribunal supremo,

- i Frankrike:

la Cour de Cassation och le Conseil d´Etat,

- i Irland:

the Supreme Court,

- i Italien:

la Corte suprema di Cassazione och il Consiglio di stato,

- i Luxemburg:

la Cour supérieure de justice, i dess sammansättning som Cour
de cassation,

- i Nederländerna:

de Hoge Raad,

- i Österrike:

Oberste Gerichtshof, Verwaltungsgerichtshof och
Verfassungsgerichtshof,

- i Portugal:

o Supremo Tribunal de Justiça och o Supremo Tribunal
Administrativo,

- i Finland:

Högsta domstolen/korkein oikeus, Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen/
korkein hallinto-oikeus, Marknadsdomstolen/markkinatuomioistuin
och Arbetsdomstolen /työtuomioistuin,

- i Sverige:

Högsta domstolen, Regeringsrätten, Arbetsdomstolen och
Marknadsdomstolen,

- Förenade kungariket:

the House of Lords och andra domstolar vilkas beslut inte går
att överklaga;

b) domstolarna i konventionsstaterna när de dömer som
överinstans.

Artikel 3

1. En behörig myndighet i en konventionsstat har rätt att
begära att domstolen uttalar sig i en fråga om tolkningen av
bestämmelserna i de instrument som nämns i artikel 1, om
avgöranden som meddelas av domstolar i den staten strider
antingen mot den tolkning som gjorts av domstolen eller mot ett
avgörande av en domstol i en annan konventionsstat, vilken
domstol nämns i artikel 2. Bestämmelserna i denna punkt gäller
endast avgöranden som har vunnit laga kraft.

2. Den tolkning som görs av domstolen i anledning av en sådan
begäran påverkar inte de avgöranden som gav upphov till begäran
om tolkning.

3. Det offentligas högsta representant vid
kassationsdomstolarna i konventionsstaterna eller varje annan
myndighet som utses av en konventionsstat är behöriga att vända
sig till domstolen med en begäran om tolkning enligt punkt 1.

4. När en begäran inkommer skall domstolens justitiesekreterare
underrätta konventionsstaterna samt Europeiska gemenskapernas
kommission och råd, vilka inom en

frist om två månader efter sådan underrättelse har rätt att
inkomma till domstolen med inlagor eller skriftliga synpunkter.

5. Det förfarande som anges i denna artikel skall inte
föranleda att avgifter tas ut eller att ersättning för
kostnader eller utlägg tillerkänns.

Artikel 4

1. Såvida inte annat föreskrivs i detta protokoll skall de
bestämmelser i Fördraget om upprättandet av Europeiska
ekonomiska gemenskapen och i det därtill bilagda protokollet om
domstolens stadga, vilka gäller när domstolen skall meddela
förhandsavgörande, tilllämpas även på förfarandet vid tolkning
av de instrument som nämns i artikel 1.

2. Domstolens rättegångsregler skall vid behov anpassas och
kompletteras enligt artikel 188 i Fördraget om upprättandet av
Europeiska ekonomiska gemenskapen.

Artikel 5

Detta protokoll skall ratificeras av signatärstaterna.
Ratifikationsinstrumenten skall deponeras hos
generalsekreteraren vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd.

Artikel 6

1. För att det här protokollet skall träda i kraft skall det
ratificeras av sju stater för vilka Romkonventionen är i kraft.
Det träder i kraft den första dagen i den tredje månaden efter
det att ratifikationsinstrument har deponerats av den av dessa
stater som sist fullgör denna formalitet. Om emellertid det
andra protokollet, som antogs i Bryssel den 19 december 1988,
vilket ger Europeiska gemenskapernas domstol viss behörighet
vid tolkning av konventionen om tillämplig lag för
avtalsförpliktelser, öppnad för undertecknande i Rom den 19
juni 1980, träder i kraft senare, träder det här protokollet i
kraft samma dag som det andra protokollet träder i kraft.

2. Varje ratifikation som äger rum efter detta protokolls
ikraftträdande skall gälla från och med den första dagen i den
tredje månaden efter depositionen av ratifikationsinstrumentet,
förutsatt att ifrågavarande stats ratifikation, godtagande
eller godkännande av Romkonventionen har blivit gällande.

Artikel 7

Generalsekreteraren vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd skall
underrätta signatärstaterna om

a) deponeringen av varje ratifikationsinstrument,

b) dagen för detta protokolls ikraftträdande,

c) förordnanden som meddelas enligt artikel 3.3,

d) meddelanden som lämnas enligt artikel 8.

Artikel 8

Konventionsstaterna skall till generalsekreteraren vid
Europeiska gemenskapernas råd överlämna texterna till sådana
lagbestämmelser som innebär ändringar i den förteckning över
domstolar som anges i artikel 2 a.

Artikel 9

Detta protokoll skall gälla så länge Romkonventionen förblir i
kraft enligt de villkor som anges i artikel 30 i den
konventionen.

Artikel 10

Varje konventionsstat får begära att detta protokoll revideras.
Om så sker, skall ordföranden för Europeiska gemenskapernas råd
sammankalla en revisionskonferens.

Artikel 11

Detta protokoll, som har upprättats i ett enda exemplar på
danska, engelska, franska, grekiska, iriska, italienska,
nederländska, portugisiska, spanska och tyska språken, vilka
tio texter äger lika giltighet, skall deponeras i arkiven hos
generalsekretariatet vid Europeiska gemenskapernas råd.
Generalsek

reteraren skall överlämna en bestyrkt kopia till regeringen i
varje signatärstat.

Till bevis på detta har undertecknande befullmäktigade ombud
underskrivit detta protokoll.

Som skedde i Bryssel den nittonde december
nittonhundraåttioåtta.
